one of the things i always tell startups is a principle i learned from paul buchheit its better to make a few people really happy than to make a lot of people semihappy. i was saying recently to a reporter that if i could only tell startups 10 things this would be one of them. then i thought what would the other 9 bewhen i made the list there turned out to be 131. pick good cofounders.cofounders are for a startup what location is for real estate. you can change anything about a house except where it is. in a startup you can change your idea easily but changing your cofounders is hard. 1 and the success of a startup is almost always a function of its founders.2. launch fast.the reason to launch fast is not so much that its critical to get your product to market early but that you havent really started working on it till youve launched. launching teaches you what you should have been building. till you know that youre wasting your time. so the main value of whatever you launch with is as a pretext for engaging users.3. let your idea evolve.this is the second half of launching fast. launch fast and iterate. its a big mistake to treat a startup as if it were merely a matter of implementing some brilliant initial idea. as in an essay most of the ideas appear in the implementing.4. understand your users.you can envision the wealth created by a startup as a rectangle where one side is the number of users and the other is how much you improve their lives. 2 the second dimension is the one you have most control over. and indeed the growth in the first will be driven by how well you do in the second. as in science the hard part is not answering questions but asking them the hard part is seeing something new that users lack. the better you understand them the better the odds of doing that. thats why so many successful startups make something the founders needed.5. better to make a few users love you than a lot ambivalent.ideally you want to make large numbers of users love you but you cant expect to hit that right away. initially you have to choose between satisfying all the needs of a subset of potential users or satisfying a subset of the needs of all potential users. take the first. its easier to expand userwise than satisfactionwise. and perhaps more importantly its harder to lie to yourself. if you think youre 85 of the way to a great product how do you know its not 70 or 10 whereas its easy to know how many users you have.6. offer surprisingly good customer service.customers are used to being maltreated. most of the companies they deal with are quasimonopolies that get away with atrocious customer service. your own ideas about whats possible have been unconsciously lowered by such experiences. try making your customer service not merely good but surprisingly good. go out of your way to make people happy. theyll be overwhelmed youll see. in the earliest stages of a startup it pays to offer customer service on a level that wouldnt scale because its a way of learning about your users.7. you make what you measure.i learned this one from joe kraus. 3 merely measuring something has an uncanny tendency to improve it. if you want to make your user numbers go up put a big piece of paper on your wall and every day plot the number of users. youll be delighted when it goes up and disappointed when it goes down. pretty soon youll start noticing what makes the number go up and youll start to do more of that. corollary be careful what you measure.8. spend little.i cant emphasize enough how important it is for a startup to be cheap. most startups fail before they make something people want and the most common form of failure is running out of money. so being cheap is almost interchangeable with iterating rapidly. 4 but its more than that. a culture of cheapness keeps companies young in something like the way exercise keeps people young.9. get ramen profitable.ramen profitable means a startup makes just enough to pay the founders living expenses. its not rapid prototyping for business models though it can be but more a way of hacking the investment process. once you cross over into ramen profitable it completely changes your relationship with investors. its also great for morale.10. avoid distractions.nothing kills startups like distractions. the worst type are those that pay money day jobs consulting profitable sideprojects. the startup may have more longterm potential but youll always interrupt working on it to answer calls from people paying you now. paradoxically fundraising is this type of distraction so try to minimize that too.11. dont get demoralized.though the immediate cause of death in a startup tends to be running out of money the underlying cause is usually lack of focus. either the company is run by stupid people which cant be fixed with advice or the people are smart but got demoralized. starting a startup is a huge moral weight. understand this and make a conscious effort not to be ground down by it just as youd be careful to bend at the knees when picking up a heavy box.12. dont give up.even if you get demoralized dont give up. you can get surprisingly far by just not giving up. this isnt true in all fields. there are a lot of people who couldnt become good mathematicians no matter how long they persisted. but startups arent like that. sheer effort is usually enough so long as you keep morphing your idea.13. deals fall through.one of the most useful skills we learned from viaweb was not getting our hopes up. we probably had 20 deals of various types fall through. after the first 10 or so we learned to treat deals as background processes that we should ignore till they terminated. its very dangerous to morale to start to depend on deals closing not just because they so often dont but because it makes them less likely to.having gotten it down to 13 sentences i asked myself which id choose if i could only keep one.understand your users. thats the key. the essential task in a startup is to create wealth the dimension of wealth you have most control over is how much you improve users lives and the hardest part of that is knowing what to make for them. once you know what to make its mere effort to make it and most decent hackers are capable of that.understanding your users is part of half the principles in this list. thats the reason to launch early to understand your users. evolving your idea is the embodiment of understanding your users. understanding your users well will tend to push you toward making something that makes a few people deeply happy. the most important reason for having surprisingly good customer service is that it helps you understand your users. and understanding your users will even ensure your morale because when everything else is collapsing around you having just ten users who love you will keep you going.

inc recently asked me who i thought were the 5 most interesting startup founders of the last 30 years. how do you decide whos the most interesting the best test seemed to be influence who are the 5 whove influenced me most who do i use as examples when im talking to companies we fund who do i find myself quoting1. steve jobsid guess steve is the most influential founder not just for me but for most people you could ask. a lot of startup culture is apple culture. he was the original young founder. and while the concept of insanely great already existed in the arts it was a novel idea to introduce into a company in the 1980s.more remarkable still hes stayed interesting for 30 years. people await new apple products the way theyd await new books by a popular novelist. steve may not literally design them but they wouldnt happen if he werent ceo.steve is clever and driven but so are a lot of people in the valley. what makes him unique is his sense of design. before him most companies treated design as a frivolous extra. apples competitors now know better.2. tj rodgerstj rodgers isnt as famous as steve jobs but he may be the best writer among silicon valley ceos. ive probably learned more from him about the startup way of thinking than from anyone else. not so much from specific things hes written as by reconstructing the mind that produced them brutally candid aggressively garbagecollecting outdated ideas and yet driven by pragmatism rather than ideology.the first essay of his that i read was so electrifying that i remember exactly where i was at the time. it was high technology innovation free markets or government subsidies and i was downstairs in the harvard square t station. it felt as if someone had flipped on a light switch inside my head.3. larry  sergeyim sorry to treat larry and sergey as one person. ive always thought that was unfair to them. but it does seem as if google was a collaboration.before google companies in silicon valley already knew it was important to have the best hackers. so they claimed at least. but google pushed this idea further than anyone had before. their hypothesis seems to have been that in the initial stages at least all you need is good hackers if you hire all the smartest people and put them to work on a problem where their success can be measured you win. all the other stuffwhich includes all the stuff that business schools think business consists ofyou can figure out along the way. the results wont be perfect but theyll be optimal. if this was their hypothesis its now been verified experimentally.4. paul buchheitfew know this but one person paul buchheit is responsible for three of the best things google has done. he was the original author of gmail which is the most impressive thing google has after search. he also wrote the first prototype of adsense and was the author of googles mantra dont be evil.pb made a point in a talk once that i now mention to every startup we fund that its better initially to make a small number of users really love you than a large number kind of like you. if i could tell startups only ten sentences this would be one of them.now hes cofounder of a startup called friendfeed. its only a year old but already everyone in the valley is watching them. someone responsible for three of the biggest ideas at google is going to come up with more.5. sam altmani was told i shouldnt mention founders of ycfunded companies in this list. but sam altman cant be stopped by such flimsy rules. if he wants to be on this list hes going to be.honestly sam is along with steve jobs the founder i refer to most when im advising startups. on questions of design i ask what would steve do but on questions of strategy or ambition i ask what would sama dowhat i learned from meeting sama is that the doctrine of the elect applies to startups. it applies way less than most people think startup investing does not consist of trying to pick winners the way you might in a horse race. but there are a few people with such force of will that theyre going to get whatever they want.

what hard liquor cigarettes heroin and crack have in common is that theyre all more concentrated forms of less addictive predecessors. most if not all the things we describe as addictive are. and the scary thing is the process that created them is accelerating.we wouldnt want to stop it. its the same process that cures diseases technological progress. technological progress means making things do more of what we want. when the thing we want is something we want to want we consider technological progress good. if some new technique makes solar cells x more efficient that seems strictly better. when progress concentrates something we dont want to want  when it transforms opium into heroin  it seems bad. but its the same process at work. 1no one doubts this process is accelerating which means increasing numbers of things we like will be transformed into things we like too much. 2as far as i know theres no word for something we like too much. the closest is the colloquial sense of addictive. that usage has become increasingly common during my lifetime. and its clear why there are an increasing number of things we need it for. at the extreme end of the spectrum are crack and meth. food has been transformed by a combination of factory farming and innovations in food processing into something with way more immediate bang for the buck and you can see the results in any town in america. checkers and solitaire have been replaced by world of warcraft and farmville. tv has become much more engaging and even so it cant compete with facebook.the world is more addictive than it was 40 years ago. and unless the forms of technological progress that produced these things are subject to different laws than technological progress in general the world will get more addictive in the next 40 years than it did in the last 40.the next 40 years will bring us some wonderful things. i dont mean to imply theyre all to be avoided. alcohol is a dangerous drug but id rather live in a world with wine than one without. most people can coexist with alcohol but you have to be careful. more things we like will mean more things we have to be careful about.most people wont unfortunately. which means that as the world becomes more addictive the two senses in which one can live a normal life will be driven ever further apart. one sense of normal is statistically normal what everyone else does. the other is the sense we mean when we talk about the normal operating range of a piece of machinery what works best.these two senses are already quite far apart. already someone trying to live well would seem eccentrically abstemious in most of the us. that phenomenon is only going to become more pronounced. you can probably take it as a rule of thumb from now on that if people dont think youre weird youre living badly.societies eventually develop antibodies to addictive new things. ive seen that happen with cigarettes. when cigarettes first appeared they spread the way an infectious disease spreads through a previously isolated population. smoking rapidly became a statistically normal thing. there were ashtrays everywhere. we had ashtrays in our house when i was a kid even though neither of my parents smoked. you had to for guests.as knowledge spread about the dangers of smoking customs changed. in the last 20 years smoking has been transformed from something that seemed totally normal into a rather seedy habit from something movie stars did in publicity shots to something small huddles of addicts do outside the doors of office buildings. a lot of the change was due to legislation of course but the legislation couldnt have happened if customs hadnt already changed.it took a while thoughon the order of 100 years. and unless the rate at which social antibodies evolve can increase to match the accelerating rate at which technological progress throws off new addictions well be increasingly unable to rely on customs to protect us. 3 unless we want to be canaries in the coal mine of each new addictionthe people whose sad example becomes a lesson to future generationswell have to figure out for ourselves what to avoid and how. it will actually become a reasonable strategy or a more reasonable strategy to suspect everything new.in fact even that wont be enough. well have to worry not just about new things but also about existing things becoming more addictive. thats what bit me. ive avoided most addictions but the internet got me because it became addictive while i was using it. 4most people i know have problems with internet addiction. were all trying to figure out our own customs for getting free of it. thats why i dont have an iphone for example the last thing i want is for the internet to follow me out into the world. 5 my latest trick is taking long hikes. i used to think running was a better form of exercise than hiking because it took less time. now the slowness of hiking seems an advantage because the longer i spend on the trail the longer i have to think without interruption.sounds pretty eccentric doesnt it it always will when youre trying to solve problems where there are no customs yet to guide you. maybe i cant plead occams razor maybe im simply eccentric. but if im right about the acceleration of addictiveness then this kind of lonely squirming to avoid it will increasingly be the fate of anyone who wants to get things done. well increasingly be defined by what we say no to.notes1 could you restrict technological progress to areas where you wanted it only in a limited way without becoming a police state. and even then your restrictions would have undesirable side effects. good and bad technological progress arent sharply differentiated so youd find you couldnt slow the latter without also slowing the former. and in any case as prohibition and the war on drugs show bans often do more harm than good.2 technology has always been accelerating. by paleolithic standards technology evolved at a blistering pace in the neolithic period.3 unless we mass produce social customs. i suspect the recent resurgence of evangelical christianity in the us is partly a reaction to drugs. in desperation people reach for the sledgehammer if their kids wont listen to them maybe theyll listen to god. but that solution has broader consequences than just getting kids to say no to drugs. you end up saying no to science as well.i worry we may be heading for a future in which only a few people plot their own itinerary through noland while everyone else books a package tour. or worse still has one booked for them by the government.4 people commonly use the word procrastination to describe what they do on the internet. it seems to me too mild to describe whats happening as merely notdoingwork. we dont call it procrastination when someone gets drunk instead of working.5 several people have told me they like the ipad because it lets them bring the internet into situations where a laptop would be too conspicuous. in other words its a hip flask. this is true of the iphone too of course but this advantage isnt as obvious because it reads as a phone and everyones used to those.

if there were intelligent beings elsewhere in the universe theyd share certain truths in common with us. the truths of mathematics would be the same because theyre true by definition. ditto for the truths of physics the mass of a carbon atom would be the same on their planet. but i think wed share other truths with aliens besides the truths of math and physics and that it would be worthwhile to think about what these might be.for example i think wed share the principle that a controlled experiment testing some hypothesis entitles us to have proportionally increased belief in it. it seems fairly likely too that it would be true for aliens that one can get better at something by practicing. wed probably share occams razor. there doesnt seem anything specifically human about any of these ideas.we can only guess of course. we cant say for sure what forms intelligent life might take. nor is it my goal here to explore that question interesting though it is. the point of the idea of alien truth is not that it gives us a way to speculate about what forms intelligent life might take but that it gives us a threshold or more precisely a target for truth. if youre trying to find the most general truths short of those of math or physics then presumably theyll be those wed share in common with other forms of intelligent life.alien truth will work best as a heuristic if we err on the side of generosity. if an idea might plausibly be relevant to aliens thats enough. justice for example. i wouldnt want to bet that all intelligent beings would understand the concept of justice but i wouldnt want to bet against it either.the idea of alien truth is related to erdoss idea of gods book. he used to describe a particularly good proof as being in gods book the implication being a that a sufficiently good proof was more discovered than invented and b that its goodness would be universally recognized. if theres such a thing as alien truth then theres more in gods book than math.what should we call the search for alien truth the obvious choice is philosophy. whatever else philosophy includes it should probably include this. im fairly sure aristotle would have thought so. one could even make the case that the search for alien truth is if not an accurate description of philosophy a good definition for it. i.e. that its what people who call themselves philosophers should be doing whether or not they currently are. but im not wedded to that doing it is what matters not what we call it.we may one day have something like alien life among us in the form of ais. and that may in turn allow us to be precise about what truths an intelligent being would have to share with us. we might find for example that its impossible to create something wed consider intelligent that doesnt use occams razor. we might one day even be able to prove that. but though this sort of research would be very interesting its not necessary for our purposes or even the same field the goal of philosophy if were going to call it that would be to see what ideas we come up with using alien truth as a target not to say precisely where the threshold of it is. those two questions might one day converge but theyll converge from quite different directions and till they do it would be too constraining to restrict ourselves to thinking only about things were certain would be alien truths. especially since this will probably be one of those areas where the best guesses turn out to be surprisingly close to optimal. lets see if that one does.whatever we call it the attempt to discover alien truths would be a worthwhile undertaking. and curiously enough that is itself probably an alien truth.

one of the more surprising things ive noticed while working on y combinator is how frightening the most ambitious startup ideas are. in this essay im going to demonstrate this phenomenon by describing some. any one of them could make you a billionaire. that might sound like an attractive prospect and yet when i describe these ideas you may notice you find yourself shrinking away from them.dont worry its not a sign of weakness. arguably its a sign of sanity. the biggest startup ideas are terrifying. and not just because theyd be a lot of work. the biggest ideas seem to threaten your identity you wonder if youd have enough ambition to carry them through.theres a scene in being john malkovich where the nerdy hero encounters a very attractive sophisticated woman. she says to himheres the thing if you ever got me you wouldnt have a clue what to do with me.thats what these ideas say to us.this phenomenon is one of the most important things you can understand about startups. 1 youd expect big startup ideas to be attractive but actually they tend to repel you. and that has a bunch of consequences. it means these ideas are invisible to most people who try to think of startup ideas because their subconscious filters them out. even the most ambitious people are probably best off approaching them obliquely.1. a new search enginethe best ideas are just on the right side of impossible. i dont know if this one is possible but there are signs it might be. making a new search engine means competing with google and recently ive noticed some cracks in their fortress.the point when it became clear to me that microsoft had lost their way was when they decided to get into the search business. that was not a natural move for microsoft. they did it because they were afraid of google and google was in the search business. but this meant a google was now setting microsofts agenda and b microsofts agenda consisted of stuff they werent good at.microsoft  google  google  facebook.that does not by itself mean theres room for a new search engine but lately when using google search ive found myself nostalgic for the old days when google was true to its own slightly aspy self. google used to give me a page of the right answers fast with no clutter. now the results seem inspired by the scientologist principle that whats true is whats true for you. and the pages dont have the clean sparse feel they used to. google search results used to look like the output of a unix utility. now if i accidentally put the cursor in the wrong place anything might happen.the way to win here is to build the search engine all the hackers use. a search engine whose users consisted of the top 10000 hackers and no one else would be in a very powerful position despite its small size just as google was when it was that search engine. and for the first time in over a decade the idea of switching seems thinkable to me.since anyone capable of starting this company is one of those 10000 hackers the route is at least straightforward make the search engine you yourself want. feel free to make it excessively hackerish. make it really good for code search for example. would you like search queries to be turing complete anything that gets you those 10000 users is ipso facto good.dont worry if something you want to do will constrain you in the long term because if you dont get that initial core of users there wont be a long term. if you can just build something that you and your friends genuinely prefer to google youre already about 10 of the way to an ipo just as facebook was though they probably didnt realize it when they got all the harvard undergrads.2. replace emailemail was not designed to be used the way we use it now. email is not a messaging protocol. its a todo list. or rather my inbox is a todo list and email is the way things get onto it. but it is a disastrously bad todo list.im open to different types of solutions to this problem but i suspect that tweaking the inbox is not enough and that email has to be replaced with a new protocol. this new protocol should be a todo list protocol not a messaging protocol although there is a degenerate case where what someone wants you to do is read the following text.as a todo list protocol the new protocol should give more power to the recipient than email does. i want there to be more restrictions on what someone can put on my todo list. and when someone can put something on my todo list i want them to tell me more about what they want from me. do they want me to do something beyond just reading some text how important is it there obviously has to be some mechanism to prevent people from saying everything is important. when does it have to be donethis is one of those ideas thats like an irresistible force meeting an immovable object. on one hand entrenched protocols are impossible to replace. on the other it seems unlikely that people in 100 years will still be living in the same email hell we do now. and if email is going to get replaced eventually why not nowif you do it right you may be able to avoid the usual chicken and egg problem new protocols face because some of the most powerful people in the world will be among the first to switch to it. theyre all at the mercy of email too.whatever you build make it fast. gmail has become painfully slow. 2 if you made something no better than gmail but fast that alone would let you start to pull users away from gmail.gmail is slow because google cant afford to spend a lot on it. but people will pay for this. id have no problem paying 50 a month. considering how much time i spend in email its kind of scary to think how much id be justified in paying. at least 1000 a month. if i spend several hours a day reading and writing email that would be a cheap way to make my life better.3. replace universitiespeople are all over this idea lately and i think theyre onto something. im reluctant to suggest that an institution thats been around for a millennium is finished just because of some mistakes they made in the last few decades but certainly in the last few decades us universities seem to have been headed down the wrong path. one could do a lot better for a lot less money.i dont think universities will disappear. they wont be replaced wholesale. theyll just lose the de facto monopoly on certain types of learning that they once had. there will be many different ways to learn different things and some may look quite different from universities. y combinator itself is arguably one of them.learning is such a big problem that changing the way people do it will have a wave of secondary effects. for example the name of the university one went to is treated by a lot of people correctly or not as a credential in its own right. if learning breaks up into many little pieces credentialling may separate from it. there may even need to be replacements for campus social life and oddly enough yc even has aspects of that.you could replace high schools too but there you face bureaucratic obstacles that would slow down a startup. universities seem the place to start.4. internet dramahollywood has been slow to embrace the internet. that was a mistake because i think we can now call a winner in the race between delivery mechanisms and it is the internet not cable.a lot of the reason is the horribleness of cable clients also known as tvs. our family didnt wait for apple tv. we hated our last tv so much that a few months ago we replaced it with an imac bolted to the wall. its a little inconvenient to control it with a wireless mouse but the overall experience is much better than the nightmare ui we had to deal with before.some of the attention people currently devote to watching movies and tv can be stolen by things that seem completely unrelated like social networking apps. more can be stolen by things that are a little more closely related like games. but there will probably always remain some residual demand for conventional drama where you sit passively and watch as a plot happens. so how do you deliver drama via the internet whatever you make will have to be on a larger scale than youtube clips. when people sit down to watch a show they want to know what theyre going to get either part of a series with familiar characters or a single longer movie whose basic premise they know in advance.there are two ways delivery and payment could play out. either some company like netflix or apple will be the app store for entertainment and youll reach audiences through them. or the wouldbe app stores will be too overreaching or too technically inflexible and companies will arise to supply payment and streaming a la carte to the producers of drama. if thats the way things play out there will also be a need for such infrastructure companies.5. the next steve jobsi was talking recently to someone who knew apple well and i asked him if the people now running the company would be able to keep creating new things the way apple had under steve jobs. his answer was simply no. i already feared that would be the answer. i asked more to see how hed qualify it. but he didnt qualify it at all. no there will be no more great new stuff beyond whatevers currently in the pipeline. apples revenues may continue to rise for a long time but as microsoft shows revenue is a lagging indicator in the technology business.so if apples not going to make the next ipad who is none of the existing players. none of them are run by product visionaries and empirically you cant seem to get those by hiring them. empirically the way you get a product visionary as ceo is for him to found the company and not get fired. so the company that creates the next wave of hardware is probably going to have to be a startup.i realize it sounds preposterously ambitious for a startup to try to become as big as apple. but no more ambitious than it was for apple to become as big as apple and they did it. plus a startup taking on this problem now has an advantage the original apple didnt the example of apple. steve jobs has shown us whats possible. that helps wouldbe successors both directly as roger bannister did by showing how much better you can do than people did before and indirectly as augustus did by lodging the idea in users minds that a single person could unroll the future for them. 3now steve is gone theres a vacuum we can all feel. if a new company led boldly into the future of hardware users would follow. the ceo of that company the next steve jobs might not measure up to steve jobs. but he wouldnt have to. hed just have to do a better job than samsung and hp and nokia and that seems pretty doable.6. bring back moores lawthe last 10 years have reminded us what moores law actually says. till about 2002 you could safely misinterpret it as promising that clock speeds would double every 18 months. actually what it says is that circuit densities will double every 18 months. it used to seem pedantic to point that out. not any more. intel can no longer give us faster cpus just more of them.this moores law is not as good as the old one. moores law used to mean that if your software was slow all you had to do was wait and the inexorable progress of hardware would solve your problems. now if your software is slow you have to rewrite it to do more things in parallel which is a lot more work than waiting.it would be great if a startup could give us something of the old moores law back by writing software that could make a large number of cpus look to the developer like one very fast cpu. there are several ways to approach this problem. the most ambitious is to try to do it automatically to write a compiler that will parallelize our code for us. theres a name for this compiler the sufficiently smart compiler and it is a byword for impossibility. but is it really impossible is there no configuration of the bits in memory of a present day computer that is this compiler if you really think so you should try to prove it because that would be an interesting result. and if its not impossible but simply very hard it might be worth trying to write it. the expected value would be high even if the chance of succeeding was low.the reason the expected value is so high is web services. if you could write software that gave programmers the convenience of the way things were in the old days you could offer it to them as a web service. and that would in turn mean that you got practically all the users.imagine there was another processor manufacturer that could still translate increased circuit densities into increased clock speeds. theyd take most of intels business. and since web services mean that no one sees their processors anymore by writing the sufficiently smart compiler you could create a situation indistinguishable from you being that manufacturer at least for the server market.the least ambitious way of approaching the problem is to start from the other end and offer programmers more parallelizable lego blocks to build programs out of like hadoop and mapreduce. then the programmer still does much of the work of optimization.theres an intriguing middle ground where you build a semiautomatic weaponwhere theres a human in the loop. you make something that looks to the user like the sufficiently smart compiler but inside has people using highly developed optimization tools to find and eliminate bottlenecks in users programs. these people might be your employees or you might create a marketplace for optimization.an optimization marketplace would be a way to generate the sufficiently smart compiler piecemeal because participants would immediately start writing bots. it would be a curious state of affairs if you could get to the point where everything could be done by bots because then youd have made the sufficiently smart compiler but no one person would have a complete copy of it.i realize how crazy all this sounds. in fact what i like about this idea is all the different ways in which its wrong. the whole idea of focusing on optimization is counter to the general trend in software development for the last several decades. trying to write the sufficiently smart compiler is by definition a mistake. and even if it werent compilers are the sort of software thats supposed to be created by open source projects not companies. plus if this works it will deprive all the programmers who take pleasure in making multithreaded apps of so much amusing complexity. the forum troll i have by now internalized doesnt even know where to begin in raising objections to this project. now thats what i call a startup idea.7. ongoing diagnosisbut wait heres another that could face even greater resistance ongoing automatic medical diagnosis.one of my tricks for generating startup ideas is to imagine the ways in which well seem backward to future generations. and im pretty sure that to people 50 or 100 years in the future it will seem barbaric that people in our era waited till they had symptoms to be diagnosed with conditions like heart disease and cancer.for example in 2004 bill clinton found he was feeling short of breath. doctors discovered that several of his arteries were over 90 blocked and 3 days later he had a quadruple bypass. it seems reasonable to assume bill clinton has the best medical care available. and yet even he had to wait till his arteries were over 90 blocked to learn that the number was over 90. surely at some point in the future well know these numbers the way we now know something like our weight. ditto for cancer. it will seem preposterous to future generations that we wait till patients have physical symptoms to be diagnosed with cancer. cancer will show up on some sort of radar screen immediately.of course what shows up on the radar screen may be different from what we think of now as cancer. i wouldnt be surprised if at any given time we have ten or even hundreds of microcancers going at once none of which normally amount to anything.a lot of the obstacles to ongoing diagnosis will come from the fact that its going against the grain of the medical profession. the way medicine has always worked is that patients come to doctors with problems and the doctors figure out whats wrong. a lot of doctors dont like the idea of going on the medical equivalent of what lawyers call a fishing expedition where you go looking for problems without knowing what youre looking for. they call the things that get discovered this way incidentalomas and they are something of a nuisance.for example a friend of mine once had her brain scanned as part of a study. she was horrified when the doctors running the study discovered what appeared to be a large tumor. after further testing it turned out to be a harmless cyst. but it cost her a few days of terror. a lot of doctors worry that if you start scanning people with no symptoms youll get this on a giant scale a huge number of false alarms that make patients panic and require expensive and perhaps even dangerous tests to resolve. but i think thats just an artifact of current limitations. if people were scanned all the time and we got better at deciding what was a real problem my friend would have known about this cyst her whole life and known it was harmless just as we do a birthmark.there is room for a lot of startups here. in addition to the technical obstacles all startups face and the bureaucratic obstacles all medical startups face theyll be going against thousands of years of medical tradition. but it will happen and it will be a great thingso great that people in the future will feel as sorry for us as we do for the generations that lived before anaesthesia and antibiotics.tacticslet me conclude with some tactical advice. if you want to take on a problem as big as the ones ive discussed dont make a direct frontal attack on it. dont say for example that youre going to replace email. if you do that you raise too many expectations. your employees and investors will constantly be asking are we there yet and youll have an army of haters waiting to see you fail. just say youre building todolist software. that sounds harmless. people can notice youve replaced email when its a fait accompli. 4empirically the way to do really big things seems to be to start with deceptively small things. want to dominate microcomputer software start by writing a basic interpreter for a machine with a few thousand users. want to make the universal web site start by building a site for harvard undergrads to stalk one another.empirically its not just for other people that you need to start small. you need to for your own sake. neither bill gates nor mark zuckerberg knew at first how big their companies were going to get. all they knew was that they were onto something. maybe its a bad idea to have really big ambitions initially because the bigger your ambition the longer its going to take and the further you project into the future the more likely youll get it wrong.i think the way to use these big ideas is not to try to identify a precise point in the future and then ask yourself how to get from here to there like the popular image of a visionary. youll be better off if you operate like columbus and just head in a general westerly direction. dont try to construct the future like a building because your current blueprint is almost certainly mistaken. start with something you know works and when you expand expand westward.the popular image of the visionary is someone with a clear view of the future but empirically it may be better to have a blurry one.notes1 its also one of the most important things vcs fail to understand about startups. most expect founders to walk in with a clear plan for the future and judge them based on that. few consciously realize that in the biggest successes there is the least correlation between the initial plan and what the startup eventually becomes.2 this sentence originally read gmail is painfully slow. thanks to paul buchheit for the correction.3 roger bannister is famous as the first person to run a mile in under 4 minutes. but his world record only lasted 46 days. once he showed it could be done lots of others followed. ten years later jim ryun ran a 359 mile as a high school junior.4 if you want to be the next apple maybe you dont even want to start with consumer electronics. maybe at first you make something hackers use. or you make something popular but apparently unimportant like a headset or router. all you need is a bridgehead.

when we sold our startup in 1998 i thought one day id do some angel investing. seven years later i still hadnt started. i put it off because it seemed mysterious and complicated. it turns out to be easier than i expected and also more interesting.the part i thought was hard the mechanics of investing really isnt. you give a startup money and they give you stock. youll probably get either preferred stock which means stock with extra rights like getting your money back first in a sale or convertible debt which means on paper youre lending the company money and the debt converts to stock at the next sufficiently big funding round. 1there are sometimes minor tactical advantages to using one or the other. the paperwork for convertible debt is simpler. but really it doesnt matter much which you use. dont spend much time worrying about the details of deal terms especially when you first start angel investing. thats not how you win at this game. when you hear people talking about a successful angel investor theyre not saying he got a 4x liquidation preference. theyre saying he invested in google.thats how you win by investing in the right startups. that is so much more important than anything else that i worry im misleading you by even talking about other things.mechanicsangel investors often syndicate deals which means they join together to invest on the same terms. in a syndicate there is usually a lead investor who negotiates the terms with the startup. but not always sometimes the startup cobbles together a syndicate of investors who approach them independently and the startups lawyer supplies the paperwork.the easiest way to get started in angel investing is to find a friend who already does it and try to get included in his syndicates. then all you have to do is write checks.dont feel like you have to join a syndicate though. its not that hard to do it yourself. you can just use the standard series aa documents wilson sonsini and y combinator published online. you should of course have your lawyer review everything. both you and the startup should have lawyers. but the lawyers dont have to create the agreement from scratch. 2when you negotiate terms with a startup there are two numbers you care about how much money youre putting in and the valuation of the company. the valuation determines how much stock you get. if you put 50000 into a company at a premoney valuation of 1 million then the postmoney valuation is 1.05 million and you get .051.05 or 4.76 of the companys stock.if the company raises more money later the new investor will take a chunk of the company away from all the existing shareholders just as you did. if in the next round they sell 10 of the company to a new investor your 4.76 will be reduced to 4.28.thats ok. dilution is normal. what saves you from being mistreated in future rounds usually is that youre in the same boat as the founders. they cant dilute you without diluting themselves just as much. and they wont dilute themselves unless they end up net ahead. so in theory each further round of investment leaves you with a smaller share of an even more valuable company till after several more rounds you end up with .5 of the company at the point where it ipos and you are very happy because your 50000 has become 5 million. 3the agreement by which you invest should have provisions that let you contribute to future rounds to maintain your percentage. so its your choice whether you get diluted. 4 if the company does really well you eventually will because eventually the valuations will get so high its not worth it for you.how much does an angel invest that varies enormously from 10000 to hundreds of thousands or in rare cases even millions. the upper bound is obviously the total amount the founders want to raise. the lower bound is 510 of the total or 10000 whichever is greater. a typical angel round these days might be 150000 raised from 5 people.valuations dont vary as much. for angel rounds its rare to see a valuation lower than half a million or higher than 4 or 5 million. 4 million is starting to be vc territory.how do you decide what valuation to offer if youre part of a round led by someone else that problem is solved for you. but what if youre investing by yourself theres no real answer. there is no rational way to value an early stage startup. the valuation reflects nothing more than the strength of the companys bargaining position. if they really want you either because they desperately need money or youre someone who can help them a lot theyll let you invest at a low valuation. if they dont need you it will be higher. so guess. the startup may not have any more idea what the number should be than you do. 5ultimately it doesnt matter much. when angels make a lot of money from a deal its not because they invested at a valuation of 1.5 million instead of 3 million. its because the company was really successful.i cant emphasize that too much. dont get hung up on mechanics or deal terms. what you should spend your time thinking about is whether the company is good.similarly founders also should not get hung up on deal terms but should spend their time thinking about how to make the company good.theres a second less obvious component of an angel investment how much youre expected to help the startup. like the amount you invest this can vary a lot. you dont have to do anything if you dont want to you could simply be a source of money. or you can become a de facto employee of the company. just make sure that you and the startup agree in advance about roughly how much youll do for them.really hot companies sometimes have high standards for angels. the ones everyone wants to invest in practically audition investors and only take money from people who are famous andor will work hard for them. but dont feel like you have to put in a lot of time or you wont get to invest in any good startups. there is a surprising lack of correlation between how hot a deal a startup is and how well it ends up doing. lots of hot startups will end up failing and lots of startups no one likes will end up succeeding. and the latter are so desperate for money that theyll take it from anyone at a low valuation. 6picking winnersit would be nice to be able to pick those out wouldnt it the part of angel investing that has most effect on your returns picking the right companies is also the hardest. so you should practically ignore or more precisely archive in the gmail sense everything ive told you so far. you may need to refer to it at some point but it is not the central issue.the central issue is picking the right startups. what make something people want is for startups pick the right startups is for investors. combined they yield pick the startups that will make something people want.how do you do that its not as simple as picking startups that are already making something wildly popular. by then its too late for angels. vcs will already be onto them. as an angel you have to pick startups before theyve got a hiteither because theyve made something great but users dont realize it yet like google early on or because theyre still an iteration or two away from the big hit like paypal when they were making software for transferring money between pdas.to be a good angel investor you have to be a good judge of potential. thats what it comes down to. vcs can be fast followers. most of them dont try to predict what will win. they just try to notice quickly when something already is winning. but angels have to be able to predict. 7one interesting consequence of this fact is that there are a lot of people out there who have never even made an angel investment and yet are already better angel investors than they realize. someone who doesnt know the first thing about the mechanics of venture funding but knows what a successful startup founder looks like is actually far ahead of someone who knows termsheets inside out but thinks hacker means someone who breaks into computers. if you can recognize good startup founders by empathizing with themif you both resonate at the same frequencythen you may already be a better startup picker than the median professional vc. 8paul buchheit for example started angel investing about a year after me and he was pretty much immediately as good as me at picking startups. my extra year of experience was rounding error compared to our ability to empathize with founders.what makes a good founder if there were a word that meant the opposite of hapless that would be the one. bad founders seem hapless. they may be smart or not but somehow events overwhelm them and they get discouraged and give up. good founders make things happen the way they want. which is not to say they force things to happen in a predefined way. good founders have a healthy respect for reality. but they are relentlessly resourceful. thats the closest i can get to the opposite of hapless. you want to fund people who are relentlessly resourceful.notice we started out talking about things and now were talking about people. there is an ongoing debate between investors which is more important the people or the ideaor more precisely the market. some like ron conway say its the peoplethat the idea will change but the people are the foundation of the company. whereas marc andreessen says hed back ok founders in a hot market over great founders in a bad one. 9these two positions are not so far apart as they seem because good people find good markets. bill gates would probably have ended up pretty rich even if ibm hadnt happened to drop the pc standard in his lap.ive thought a lot about the disagreement between the investors who prefer to bet on people and those who prefer to bet on markets. its kind of surprising that it even exists. youd expect opinions to have converged more.but i think ive figured out whats going on. the three most prominent people i know who favor markets are marc jawed karim and joe kraus. and all three of them in their own startups basically flew into a thermal they hit a market growing so fast that it was all they could do to keep up with it. that kind of experience is hard to ignore. plus i think they underestimate themselves they think back to how easy it felt to ride that huge thermal upward and they think anyone could have done it. but that isnt true they are not ordinary people.so as an angel investor i think you want to go with ron conway and bet on people. thermals happen yes but no one can predict themnot even the founders and certainly not you as an investor. and only good people can ride the thermals if they hit them anyway.deal flowof course the question of how to choose startups presumes you have startups to choose between. how do you find them this is yet another problem that gets solved for you by syndicates. if you tag along on a friends investments you dont have to find startups.the problem is not finding startups exactly but finding a stream of reasonably high quality ones. the traditional way to do this is through contacts. if youre friends with a lot of investors and founders theyll send deals your way. the valley basically runs on referrals. and once you start to become known as reliable useful investor people will refer lots of deals to you. i certainly will.theres also a newer way to find startups which is to come to events like y combinators demo day where a batch of newly created startups presents to investors all at once. we have two demo days a year one in march and one in august. these are basically mass referrals.but events like demo day only account for a fraction of matches between startups and investors. the personal referral is still the most common route. so if you want to hear about new startups the best way to do it is to get lots of referrals.the best way to get lots of referrals is to invest in startups. no matter how smart and nice you seem insiders will be reluctant to send you referrals until youve proven yourself by doing a couple investments. some smart nice guys turn out to be flaky highmaintenance investors. but once you prove yourself as a good investor the deal flow as they call it will increase rapidly in both quality and quantity. at the extreme for someone like ron conway it is basically identical with the deal flow of the whole valley.so if you want to invest seriously the way to get started is to bootstrap yourself off your existing connections be a good investor in the startups you meet that way and eventually youll start a chain reaction. good investors are rare even in silicon valley. there probably arent more than a couple hundred serious angels in the whole valley and yet theyre probably the single most important ingredient in making the valley what it is. angels are the limiting reagent in startup formation.if there are only a couple hundred serious angels in the valley then by deciding to become one you could singlehandedly make the pipeline for startups in silicon valley significantly wider. that is kind of mindblowing.being goodhow do you be a good angel investor the first thing you need is to be decisive. when we talk to founders about good and bad investors one of the ways we describe the good ones is to say he writes checks. that doesnt mean the investor says yes to everyone. far from it. it means he makes up his mind quickly and follows through. you may be thinking how hard could that be youll see when you try it. it follows from the nature of angel investing that the decisions are hard. you have to guess early at the stage when the most promising ideas still seem counterintuitive because if they were obviously good vcs would already have funded them.suppose its 1998. you come across a startup founded by a couple grad students. they say theyre going to work on internet search. there are already a bunch of big public companies doing search. how can these grad students possibly compete with them and does search even matter anyway all the search engines are trying to get people to start calling them portals instead. why would you want to invest in a startup run by a couple of nobodies who are trying to compete with large aggressive companies in an area they themselves have declared passe and yet the grad students seem pretty smart. what do you dotheres a hack for being decisive when youre inexperienced ratchet down the size of your investment till its an amount you wouldnt care too much about losing. for every rich person you probably shouldnt try angel investing unless you think of yourself as rich theres some amount that would be painless though annoying to lose. till you feel comfortable investing dont invest more than that per startup.for example if you have 5 million in investable assets it would probably be painless though annoying to lose 15000. thats less than .3 of your net worth. so start by making 3 or 4 15000 investments. nothing will teach you about angel investing like experience. treat the first few as an educational expense. 60000 is less than a lot of graduate programs. plus you get equity.whats really uncool is to be strategically indecisive to string founders along while trying to gather more information about the startups trajectory. 10 theres always a temptation to do that because you just have so little to go on but you have to consciously resist it. in the long term its to your advantage to be good.the other component of being a good angel investor is simply to be a good person. angel investing is not a business where you make money by screwing people over. startups create wealth and creating wealth is not a zero sum game. no one has to lose for you to win. in fact if you mistreat the founders you invest in theyll just get demoralized and the company will do worse. plus your referrals will dry up. so i recommend being good.the most successful angel investors i know are all basically good people. once they invest in a company all they want to do is help it. and theyll help people they havent invested in too. when they do favors they dont seem to keep track of them. its too much overhead. they just try to help everyone and assume good things will flow back to them somehow. empirically that seems to work.notes1 convertible debt can be either capped at a particular valuation or can be done at a discount to whatever the valuation turns out to be when it converts. e.g. convertible debt at a discount of 30 means when it converts you get stock as if youd invested at a 30 lower valuation. that can be useful in cases where you cant or dont want to figure out what the valuation should be. you leave it to the next investor. on the other hand a lot of investors want to know exactly what theyre getting so they will only do convertible debt with a cap.2 the expensive part of creating an agreement from scratch is not writing the agreement but bickering at several hundred dollars an hour over the details. thats why the series aa paperwork aims at a middle ground. you can just start from the compromise youd have reached after lots of back and forth.when you fund a startup both your lawyers should be specialists in startups. do not use ordinary corporate lawyers for this. their inexperience makes them overbuild theyll create huge overcomplicated agreements and spend hours arguing over irrelevant things.in the valley the top startup law firms are wilson sonsini orrick fenwick  west gunderson dettmer and cooley godward. in boston the best are goodwin procter wilmer hale and foley hoag.3 your mileage may vary.4 these antidilution provisions also protect you against tricks like a later investor trying to steal the company by doing another round that values the company at 1. if you have a competent startup lawyer handle the deal for you you should be protected against such tricks initially. but it could become a problem later. if a big vc firm wants to invest in the startup after you they may try to make you take out your antidilution protections. and if they do the startup will be pressuring you to agree. theyll tell you that if you dont youre going to kill their deal with the vc. i recommend you solve this problem by having a gentlemens agreement with the founders agree with them in advance that youre not going to give up your antidilution protections. then its up to them to tell vcs early on.the reason you dont want to give them up is the following scenario. the vcs recapitalize the company meaning they give it additional funding at a premoney valuation of zero. this wipes out the existing shareholders including both you and the founders. they then grant the founders lots of options because they need them to stay around but you get nothing.obviously this is not a nice thing to do. it doesnt happen often. brandname vcs wouldnt recapitalize a company just to steal a few percent from an angel. but theres a continuum here. a less upstanding lowertier vc might be tempted to do it to steal a big chunk of stock.im not saying you should always absolutely refuse to give up your antidilution protections. everything is a negotiation. if youre part of a powerful syndicate you might be able to give up legal protections and rely on social ones. if you invest in a deal led by a big angel like ron conway for example youre pretty well protected against being mistreated because any vc would think twice before crossing him. this kind of protection is one of the reasons angels like to invest in syndicates.5 dont invest so much or at such a low valuation that you end up with an excessively large share of a startup unless youre sure your money will be the last they ever need. later stage investors wont invest in a company if the founders dont have enough equity left to motivate them. i talked to a vc recently who said hed met with a company he really liked but he turned them down because investors already owned more than half of it. those investors probably thought theyd been pretty clever by getting such a large chunk of this desirable company but in fact they were shooting themselves in the foot.6 at any given time i know of at least 3 or 4 yc alumni who i believe will be big successes but who are running on vapor financially because investors dont yet get what theyre doing. and no unfortunately i cant tell you who they are. i cant refer a startup to an investor i dont know.7 there are some vcs who can predict instead of reacting. not surprisingly these are the most successful ones.8 its somewhat sneaky of me to put it this way because the median vc loses money. thats one of the most surprising things ive learned about vc while working on y combinator. only a fraction of vcs even have positive returns. the rest exist to satisfy demand among fund managers for venture capital as an asset class. learning this explained a lot about some of the vcs i encountered when we were working on viaweb.9 vcs also generally say they prefer great markets to great people. but what theyre really saying is they want both. theyre so selective that they only even consider great people. so when they say they care above all about big markets they mean thats how they choose between great people.10 founders rightly dislike the sort of investor who says hes interested in investing but doesnt want to lead. there are circumstances where this is an acceptable excuse but more often than not what it means is no but if you turn out to be a hot deal i want to be able to claim retroactively i said yes.if you like a startup enough to invest in it then invest in it. just use the standard series aa terms and write them a check.

when i talk to a startup thats been operating for more than 8 or 9 months the first thing i want to know is almost always the same. assuming their expenses remain constant and their revenue growth is what it has been over the last several months do they make it to profitability on the money they have left or to put it more dramatically by default do they live or diethe startling thing is how often the founders themselves dont know. half the founders i talk to dont know whether theyre default alive or default dead.if youre among that number trevor blackwell has made a handy calculator you can use to find out.the reason i want to know first whether a startup is default alive or default dead is that the rest of the conversation depends on the answer. if the company is default alive we can talk about ambitious new things they could do. if its default dead we probably need to talk about how to save it. we know the current trajectory ends badly. how can they get off that trajectorywhy do so few founders know whether theyre default alive or default dead mainly i think because theyre not used to asking that. its not a question that makes sense to ask early on any more than it makes sense to ask a 3 year old how he plans to support himself. but as the company grows older the question switches from meaningless to critical. that kind of switch often takes people by surprise.i propose the following solution instead of starting to ask too late whether youre default alive or default dead start asking too early. its hard to say precisely when the question switches polarity. but its probably not that dangerous to start worrying too early that youre default dead whereas its very dangerous to start worrying too late.the reason is a phenomenon i wrote about earlier the fatal pinch. the fatal pinch is default dead  slow growth  not enough time to fix it. and the way founders end up in it is by not realizing thats where theyre headed.there is another reason founders dont ask themselves whether theyre default alive or default dead they assume it will be easy to raise more money. but that assumption is often false and worse still the more you depend on it the falser it becomes.maybe it will help to separate facts from hopes. instead of thinking of the future with vague optimism explicitly separate the components. say were default dead but were counting on investors to save us. maybe as you say that it will set off the same alarms in your head that it does in mine. and if you set off the alarms sufficiently early you may be able to avoid the fatal pinch.it would be safe to be default dead if you could count on investors saving you. as a rule their interest is a function of growth. if you have steep revenue growth say over 5x a year you can start to count on investors being interested even if youre not profitable. 1 but investors are so fickle that you can never do more than start to count on them. sometimes something about your business will spook investors even if your growth is great. so no matter how good your growth is you can never safely treat fundraising as more than a plan a. you should always have a plan b as well you should know as in write down precisely what youll need to do to survive if you cant raise more money and precisely when youll have to switch to plan b if plan a isnt working.in any case growing fast versus operating cheaply is far from the sharp dichotomy many founders assume it to be. in practice there is surprisingly little connection between how much a startup spends and how fast it grows. when a startup grows fast its usually because the product hits a nerve in the sense of hitting some big need straight on. when a startup spends a lot its usually because the product is expensive to develop or sell or simply because theyre wasteful.if youre paying attention youll be asking at this point not just how to avoid the fatal pinch but how to avoid being default dead. that one is easy dont hire too fast. hiring too fast is by far the biggest killer of startups that raise money. 2founders tell themselves they need to hire in order to grow. but most err on the side of overestimating this need rather than underestimating it. why partly because theres so much work to do. naive founders think that if they can just hire enough people it will all get done. partly because successful startups have lots of employees so it seems like thats what one does in order to be successful. in fact the large staffs of successful startups are probably more the effect of growth than the cause. and partly because when founders have slow growth they dont want to face what is usually the real reason the product is not appealing enough.plus founders whove just raised money are often encouraged to overhire by the vcs who funded them. killorcure strategies are optimal for vcs because theyre protected by the portfolio effect. vcs want to blow you up in one sense of the phrase or the other. but as a founder your incentives are different. you want above all to survive. 3heres a common way startups die. they make something moderately appealing and have decent initial growth. they raise their first round fairly easily because the founders seem smart and the idea sounds plausible. but because the product is only moderately appealing growth is ok but not great. the founders convince themselves that hiring a bunch of people is the way to boost growth. their investors agree. but because the product is only moderately appealing the growth never comes. now theyre rapidly running out of runway. they hope further investment will save them. but because they have high expenses and slow growth theyre now unappealing to investors. theyre unable to raise more and the company dies.what the company should have done is address the fundamental problem that the product is only moderately appealing. hiring people is rarely the way to fix that. more often than not it makes it harder. at this early stage the product needs to evolve more than to be built out and thats usually easier with fewer people. 4asking whether youre default alive or default dead may save you from this. maybe the alarm bells it sets off will counteract the forces that push you to overhire. instead youll be compelled to seek growth in other ways. for example by doing things that dont scale or by redesigning the product in the way only founders can. and for many if not most startups these paths to growth will be the ones that actually work.airbnb waited 4 months after raising money at the end of y combinator before they hired their first employee. in the meantime the founders were terribly overworked. but they were overworked evolving airbnb into the astonishingly successful organism it is now.notes1 steep usage growth will also interest investors. revenue will ultimately be a constant multiple of usage so x usage growth predicts x revenue growth. but in practice investors discount merely predicted revenue so if youre measuring usage you need a higher growth rate to impress investors.2 startups that dont raise money are saved from hiring too fast because they cant afford to. but that doesnt mean you should avoid raising money in order to avoid this problem any more than that total abstinence is the only way to avoid becoming an alcoholic.3 i would not be surprised if vcs tendency to push founders to overhire is not even in their own interest. they dont know how many of the companies that get killed by overspending might have done well if theyd survived. my guess is a significant number.4 after reading a draft sam altman wrotei think you should make the hiring point more strongly. i think its roughly correct to say that ycs most successful companies have never been the fastest to hire and one of the marks of a great founder is being able to resist this urge.paul buchheit addsa related problem that i see a lot is premature scalingfounders take a small business that isnt really working bad unit economics typically and then scale it up because they want impressive growth numbers. this is similar to overhiring in that it makes the business much harder to fix once its big plus they are bleeding cash really fast.

i dont think apple realizes how badly the app store approval process is broken. or rather i dont think they realize how much it matters that its broken.the way apple runs the app store has harmed their reputation with programmers more than anything else theyve ever done. their reputation with programmers used to be great. it used to be the most common complaint you heard about apple was that their fans admired them too uncritically. the app store has changed that. now a lot of programmers have started to see apple as evil.how much of the goodwill apple once had with programmers have they lost over the app store a third half and thats just so far. the app store is an ongoing karma leak.  how did apple get into this mess their fundamental problem is that they dont understand software.they treat iphone apps the way they treat the music they sell through itunes. apple is the channel they own the user if you want to reach users you do it on their terms. the record labels agreed reluctantly. but this model doesnt work for software. it doesnt work for an intermediary to own the user. the software business learned that in the early 1980s when companies like visicorp showed that although the words software and publisher fit together the underlying concepts dont. software isnt like music or books. its too complicated for a third party to act as an intermediary between developer and user. and yet thats what apple is trying to be with the app store a software publisher. and a particularly overreaching one at that with fussy tastes and a rigidly enforced house style.if software publishing didnt work in 1980 it works even less now that software development has evolved from a small number of big releases to a constant stream of small ones. but apple doesnt understand that either. their model of product development derives from hardware. they work on something till they think its finished then they release it. you have to do that with hardware but because software is so easy to change its design can benefit from evolution. the standard way to develop applications now is to launch fast and iterate. which means its a disaster to have long random delays each time you release a new version.apparently apples attitude is that developers should be more careful when they submit a new version to the app store. they would say that. but powerful as they are theyre not powerful enough to turn back the evolution of technology. programmers dont use launchfastanditerate out of laziness. they use it because it yields the best results. by obstructing that process apple is making them do bad work and programmers hate that as much as apple would.how would apple like it if when they discovered a serious bug in os x instead of releasing a software update immediately they had to submit their code to an intermediary who sat on it for a month and then rejected it because it contained an icon they didnt likeby breaking software development apple gets the opposite of what they intended the version of an app currently available in the app store tends to be an old and buggy one. one developer told meas a result of their process the app store is full of halfbaked applications. i make a new version almost every day that i release to beta users. the version on the app store feels old and crappy. im sure that a lot of developers feel this way one emotion is im not really proud about whats in the app store and its combined with the emotion really its apples fault.another wrotei believe that they think their approval process helps users by ensuring quality. in reality bugs like ours get through all the time and then it can take 48 weeks to get that bug fix approved leaving users to think that iphone apps sometimes just dont work. worse for apple these apps work just fine on other platforms that have immediate approval processes.actually i suppose apple has a third misconception that all the complaints about app store approvals are not a serious problem. they must hear developers complaining. but partners and suppliers are always complaining. it would be a bad sign if they werent it would mean you were being too easy on them. meanwhile the iphone is selling better than ever. so why do they need to fix anythingthey get away with maltreating developers in the short term because they make such great hardware. i just bought a new 27 imac a couple days ago. its fabulous. the screens too shiny and the disk is surprisingly loud but its so beautiful that you cant make yourself care.so i bought it but i bought it for the first time with misgivings. i felt the way id feel buying something made in a country with a bad human rights record. that was new. in the past when i bought things from apple it was an unalloyed pleasure. oh boy they make such great stuff. this time it felt like a faustian bargain. they make such great stuff but theyre such assholes. do i really want to support this company  should apple care what people like me think what difference does it make if they alienate a small minority of their usersthere are a couple reasons they should care. one is that these users are the people they want as employees. if your company seems evil the best programmers wont work for you. that hurt microsoft a lot starting in the 90s. programmers started to feel sheepish about working there. it seemed like selling out. when people from microsoft were talking to other programmers and they mentioned where they worked there were a lot of selfdeprecating jokes about having gone over to the dark side. but the real problem for microsoft wasnt the embarrassment of the people they hired. it was the people they never got. and you know who got them google and apple. if microsoft was the empire they were the rebel alliance. and its largely because they got more of the best people that google and apple are doing so much better than microsoft today.why are programmers so fussy about their employers morals partly because they can afford to be. the best programmers can work wherever they want. they dont have to work for a company they have qualms about.but the other reason programmers are fussy i think is that evil begets stupidity. an organization that wins by exercising power starts to lose the ability to win by doing better work. and its not fun for a smart person to work in a place where the best ideas arent the ones that win. i think the reason google embraced dont be evil so eagerly was not so much to impress the outside world as to inoculate themselves against arrogance. 1that has worked for google so far. theyve become more bureaucratic but otherwise they seem to have held true to their original principles. with apple that seems less the case. when you look at the famous 1984 ad now its easier to imagine apple as the dictator on the screen than the woman with the hammer. 2 in fact if you read the dictators speech it sounds uncannily like a prophecy of the app store.we have triumphed over the unprincipled dissemination of facts.we have created for the first time in all history a garden of pure ideology where each worker may bloom secure from the pests of contradictory and confusing truths.the other reason apple should care what programmers think of them is that when you sell a platform developers make or break you. if anyone should know this apple should. visicalc made the apple ii.and programmers build applications for the platforms they use. most applicationsmost startups probablygrow out of personal projects. apple itself did. apple made microcomputers because thats what steve wozniak wanted for himself. he couldnt have afforded a minicomputer. 3 microsoft likewise started out making interpreters for little microcomputers because bill gates and paul allen were interested in using them. its a rare startup that doesnt build something the founders use.the main reason there are so many iphone apps is that so many programmers have iphones. they may know because they read it in an article that blackberry has such and such market share. but in practice its as if rim didnt exist. if theyre going to build something they want to be able to use it themselves and that means building an iphone app.so programmers continue to develop iphone apps even though apple continues to maltreat them. theyre like someone stuck in an abusive relationship. theyre so attracted to the iphone that they cant leave. but theyre looking for a way out. one wrotewhile i did enjoy developing for the iphone the control they place on the app store does not give me the drive to develop applications as i would like. in fact i dont intend to make any more iphone applications unless absolutely necessary. 4can anything break this cycle no device ive seen so far could. palm and rim havent a hope. the only credible contender is android. but android is an orphan google doesnt really care about it not the way apple cares about the iphone. apple cares about the iphone the way google cares about search.  is the future of handheld devices one locked down by apple its a worrying prospect. it would be a bummer to have another grim monoculture like we had in the 1990s. in 1995 writing software for end users was effectively identical with writing windows applications. our horror at that prospect was the single biggest thing that drove us to start building web apps.at least we know now what it would take to break apples lock. youd have to get iphones out of programmers hands. if programmers used some other device for mobile web access theyd start to develop apps for that instead.how could you make a device programmers liked better than the iphone its unlikely you could make something better designed. apple leaves no room there. so this alternative device probably couldnt win on general appeal. it would have to win by virtue of some appeal it had to programmers specifically.one way to appeal to programmers is with software. if you could think of an application programmers had to have but that would be impossible in the circumscribed world of the iphone you could presumably get them to switch.that would definitely happen if programmers started to use handhelds as development machinesif handhelds displaced laptops the way laptops displaced desktops. you need more control of a development machine than apple will let you have over an iphone.could anyone make a device that youd carry around in your pocket like a phone and yet would also work as a development machine its hard to imagine what it would look like. but ive learned never to say never about technology. a phonesized device that would work as a development machine is no more miraculous by present standards than the iphone itself would have seemed by the standards of 1995.my current development machine is a macbook air which i use with an external monitor and keyboard in my office and by itself when traveling. if there was a version half the size id prefer it. that still wouldnt be small enough to carry around everywhere like a phone but were within a factor of 4 or so. surely that gap is bridgeable. in fact lets make it an rfs. wanted woman with hammer.notes1 when google adopted dont be evil they were still so small that no one would have expected them to be yet.2 the dictator in the 1984 ad isnt microsoft incidentally its ibm. ibm seemed a lot more frightening in those days but they were friendlier to developers than apple is now.3 he couldnt even afford a monitor. thats why the apple i used a tv as a monitor.4 several people i talked to mentioned how much they liked the iphone sdk. the problem is not apples products but their policies. fortunately policies are software apple can change them instantly if they want to. handy that isnt it

one of the differences between big companies and startups is that big companies tend to have developed procedures to protect themselves against mistakes. a startup walks like a toddler bashing into things and falling over all the time. a big company is more deliberate.the gradual accumulation of checks in an organization is a kind of learning based on disasters that have happened to it or others like it. after giving a contract to a supplier who goes bankrupt and fails to deliver for example a company might require all suppliers to prove theyre solvent before submitting bids.as companies grow they invariably get more such checks either in response to disasters theyve suffered or probably more often by hiring people from bigger companies who bring with them customs for protecting against new types of disasters.its natural for organizations to learn from mistakes. the problem is people who propose new checks almost never consider that the check itself has a cost.every check has a cost. for example consider the case of making suppliers verify their solvency. surely thats mere prudence but in fact it could have substantial costs. theres obviously the direct cost in time of the people on both sides who supply and check proofs of the suppliers solvency. but the real costs are the ones you never hear about the company that would be the best supplier but doesnt bid because they cant spare the effort to get verified. or the company that would be the best supplier but falls just short of the threshold for solvencywhich will of course have been set on the high side since there is no apparent cost of increasing it.whenever someone in an organization proposes to add a new check they should have to explain not just the benefit but the cost. no matter how bad a job they did of analyzing it this metacheck would at least remind everyone there had to be a cost and send them looking for it.if companies started doing that theyd find some surprises. joel spolsky recently spoke at y combinator about selling software to corporate customers. he said that in most companies software costing up to about 1000 could be bought by individual managers without any additional approvals. above that threshold software purchases generally had to be approved by a committee. but babysitting this process was so expensive for software vendors that it didnt make sense to charge less than 50000. which means if youre making something you might otherwise have charged 5000 for you have to sell it for 50000 instead.the purpose of the committee is presumably to ensure that the company doesnt waste money. and yet the result is that the company pays 10 times as much.checks on purchases will always be expensive because the harder it is to sell something to you the more it has to cost. and not merely linearly either. if youre hard enough to sell to the people who are best at making things dont want to bother. the only people who will sell to you are companies that specialize in selling to you. then youve sunk to a whole new level of inefficiency. market mechanisms no longer protect you because the good suppliers are no longer in the market.such things happen constantly to the biggest organizations of all governments. but checks instituted by governments can cause much worse problems than merely overpaying. checks instituted by governments can cripple a countrys whole economy. up till about 1400 china was richer and more technologically advanced than europe. one reason europe pulled ahead was that the chinese government restricted long trading voyages. so it was left to the europeans to explore and eventually to dominate the rest of the world including china.in more recent times sarbanesoxley has practically destroyed the us ipo market. that wasnt the intention of the legislators who wrote it. they just wanted to add a few more checks on public companies. but they forgot to consider the cost. they forgot that companies about to go public are usually rather stretched and that the weight of a few extra checks that might be easy for general electric to bear are enough to prevent younger companies from being public at all.once you start to think about the cost of checks you can start to ask other interesting questions. is the cost increasing or decreasing is it higher in some areas than others where does it increase discontinuously if large organizations started to ask questions like that theyd learn some frightening things.i think the cost of checks may actually be increasing. the reason is that software plays an increasingly important role in companies and the people who write software are particularly harmed by checks.programmers are unlike many types of workers in that the best ones actually prefer to work hard. this doesnt seem to be the case in most types of work. when i worked in fast food we didnt prefer the busy times. and when i used to mow lawns i definitely didnt prefer it when the grass was long after a week of rain.programmers though like it better when they write more code. or more precisely when they release more code. programmers like to make a difference. good ones anyway.for good programmers one of the best things about working for a startup is that there are few checks on releases. in true startups there are no external checks at all. if you have an idea for a new feature in the morning you can write it and push it to the production servers before lunch. and when you can do that you have more ideas.at big companies software has to go through various approvals before it can be launched. and the cost of doing this can be enormousin fact discontinuous. i was talking recently to a group of three programmers whose startup had been acquired a few years before by a big company. when theyd been independent they could release changes instantly. now they said the absolute fastest they could get code released on the production servers was two weeks.this didnt merely make them less productive. it made them hate working for the acquirer.heres a sign of how much programmers like to be able to work hard these guys would have paid to be able to release code immediately the way they used to. i asked them if theyd trade 10 of the acquisition price for the ability to release code immediately and all three instantly said yes. then i asked what was the maximum percentage of the acquisition price theyd trade for it. they said they didnt want to think about it because they didnt want to know how high theyd go but i got the impression it might be as much as half.theyd have sacrificed hundreds of thousands of dollars perhaps millions just to be able to deliver more software to users. and you know what it would have been perfectly safe to let them. in fact the acquirer would have been better off not only wouldnt these guys have broken anything theyd have gotten a lot more done. so the acquirer is in fact getting worse performance at greater cost. just like the committee approving software purchases.and just as the greatest danger of being hard to sell to is not that you overpay but that the best suppliers wont even sell to you the greatest danger of applying too many checks to your programmers is not that youll make them unproductive but that good programmers wont even want to work for you.steve jobss famous maxim artists ship works both ways. artists arent merely capable of shipping. they insist on it. so if you dont let people ship you wont have any artists.

the economic situation is apparently so grim that some experts fear we may be in for a stretch as bad as the mid seventies.when microsoft and apple were founded.as those examples suggest a recession may not be such a bad time to start a startup. im not claiming its a particularly good time either. the truth is more boring the state of the economy doesnt matter much either way.if weve learned one thing from funding so many startups its that they succeed or fail based on the qualities of the founders. the economy has some effect certainly but as a predictor of success its rounding error compared to the founders.which means that what matters is who you are not when you do it. if youre the right sort of person youll win even in a bad economy. and if youre not a good economy wont save you. someone who thinks i better not start a startup now because the economy is so bad is making the same mistake as the people who thought during the bubble all i have to do is start a startup and ill be rich.so if you want to improve your chances you should think far more about who you can recruit as a cofounder than the state of the economy. and if youre worried about threats to the survival of your company dont look for them in the news. look in the mirror.but for any given team of founders would it not pay to wait till the economy is better before taking the leap if youre starting a restaurant maybe but not if youre working on technology. technology progresses more or less independently of the stock market. so for any given idea the payoff for acting fast in a bad economy will be higher than for waiting. microsofts first product was a basic interpreter for the altair. that was exactly what the world needed in 1975 but if gates and allen had decided to wait a few years it would have been too late.of course the idea you have now wont be the last you have. there are always new ideas. but if you have a specific idea you want to act on act now.that doesnt mean you can ignore the economy. both customers and investors will be feeling pinched. its not necessarily a problem if customers feel pinched you may even be able to benefit from it by making things that save money. startups often make things cheaper so in that respect theyre better positioned to prosper in a recession than big companies.investors are more of a problem. startups generally need to raise some amount of external funding and investors tend to be less willing to invest in bad times. they shouldnt be. everyone knows youre supposed to buy when times are bad and sell when times are good. but of course what makes investing so counterintuitive is that in equity markets good times are defined as everyone thinking its time to buy. you have to be a contrarian to be correct and by definition only a minority of investors can be.so just as investors in 1999 were tripping over one another trying to buy into lousy startups investors in 2009 will presumably be reluctant to invest even in good ones.youll have to adapt to this. but thats nothing new startups always have to adapt to the whims of investors. ask any founder in any economy if theyd describe investors as fickle and watch the face they make. last year you had to be prepared to explain how your startup was viral. next year youll have to explain how its recessionproof.those are both good things to be. the mistake investors make is not the criteria they use but that they always tend to focus on one to the exclusion of the rest.fortunately the way to make a startup recessionproof is to do exactly what you should do anyway run it as cheaply as possible. for years ive been telling founders that the surest route to success is to be the cockroaches of the corporate world. the immediate cause of death in a startup is always running out of money. so the cheaper your company is to operate the harder it is to kill. and fortunately it has gotten very cheap to run a startup. a recession will if anything make it cheaper still.if nuclear winter really is here it may be safer to be a cockroach even than to keep your job. customers may drop off individually if they can no longer afford you but youre not going to lose them all at once markets dont reduce headcount.what if you quit your job to start a startup that fails and you cant find another that could be a problem if you work in sales or marketing. in those fields it can take months to find a new job in a bad economy. but hackers seem to be more liquid. good hackers can always get some kind of job. it might not be your dream job but youre not going to starve.another advantage of bad times is that theres less competition. technology trains leave the station at regular intervals. if everyone else is cowering in a corner you may have a whole car to yourself.youre an investor too. as a founder youre buying stock with work the reason larry and sergey are so rich is not so much that theyve done work worth tens of billions of dollars but that they were the first investors in google. and like any investor you should buy when times are bad.were you nodding in agreement thinking stupid investors a few paragraphs ago when i was talking about how investors are reluctant to put money into startups in bad markets even though thats the time they should rationally be most willing to buy well founders arent much better. when times get bad hackers go to grad school. and no doubt that will happen this time too. in fact what makes the preceding paragraph true is that most readers wont believe itat least to the extent of acting on it.so maybe a recession is a good time to start a startup. its hard to say whether advantages like lack of competition outweigh disadvantages like reluctant investors. but it doesnt matter much either way. its the people that matter. and for a given set of people working on a given technology the time to act is always now.

this essay is derived from a guest lecture in sam altmans startup class at stanford. its intended for college students but much of it is applicable to potential founders at other ages.one of the advantages of having kids is that when you have to give advice you can ask yourself what would i tell my own kids my kids are little but i can imagine what id tell them about startups if they were in college and thats what im going to tell you.startups are very counterintuitive. im not sure why. maybe its just because knowledge about them hasnt permeated our culture yet. but whatever the reason starting a startup is a task where you cant always trust your instincts.its like skiing in that way. when you first try skiing and you want to slow down your instinct is to lean back. but if you lean back on skis you fly down the hill out of control. so part of learning to ski is learning to suppress that impulse. eventually you get new habits but at first it takes a conscious effort. at first theres a list of things youre trying to remember as you start down the hill.startups are as unnatural as skiing so theres a similar list for startups. here im going to give you the first part of it  the things to remember if you want to prepare yourself to start a startup.counterintuitivethe first item on it is the fact i already mentioned that startups are so weird that if you trust your instincts youll make a lot of mistakes. if you know nothing more than this you may at least pause before making them.when i was running y combinator i used to joke that our function was to tell founders things they would ignore. its really true. batch after batch the yc partners warn founders about mistakes theyre about to make and the founders ignore them and then come back a year later and say i wish wed listened.why do the founders ignore the partners advice well thats the thing about counterintuitive ideas they contradict your intuitions. they seem wrong. so of course your first impulse is to disregard them. and in fact my joking description is not merely the curse of y combinator but part of its raison detre. if founders instincts already gave them the right answers they wouldnt need us. you only need other people to give you advice that surprises you. thats why there are a lot of ski instructors and not many running instructors. 1you can however trust your instincts about people. and in fact one of the most common mistakes young founders make is not to do that enough. they get involved with people who seem impressive but about whom they feel some misgivings personally. later when things blow up they say i knew there was something off about him but i ignored it because he seemed so impressive.if youre thinking about getting involved with someone  as a cofounder an employee an investor or an acquirer  and you have misgivings about them trust your gut. if someone seems slippery or bogus or a jerk dont ignore it.this is one case where it pays to be selfindulgent. work with people you genuinely like and youve known long enough to be sure.expertisethe second counterintuitive point is that its not that important to know a lot about startups. the way to succeed in a startup is not to be an expert on startups but to be an expert on your users and the problem youre solving for them. mark zuckerberg didnt succeed because he was an expert on startups. he succeeded despite being a complete noob at startups because he understood his users really well.if you dont know anything about say how to raise an angel round dont feel bad on that account. that sort of thing you can learn when you need to and forget after youve done it.in fact i worry its not merely unnecessary to learn in great detail about the mechanics of startups but possibly somewhat dangerous. if i met an undergrad who knew all about convertible notes and employee agreements and god forbid class ff stock i wouldnt think here is someone who is way ahead of their peers. it would set off alarms. because another of the characteristic mistakes of young founders is to go through the motions of starting a startup. they make up some plausiblesounding idea raise money at a good valuation rent a cool office hire a bunch of people. from the outside that seems like what startups do. but the next step after rent a cool office and hire a bunch of people is gradually realize how completely fucked they are because while imitating all the outward forms of a startup they have neglected the one thing thats actually essential making something people want.gamewe saw this happen so often that we made up a name for it playing house. eventually i realized why it was happening. the reason young founders go through the motions of starting a startup is because thats what theyve been trained to do for their whole lives up to that point. think about what you have to do to get into college for example. extracurricular activities check. even in college classes most of the work is as artificial as running laps.im not attacking the educational system for being this way. there will always be a certain amount of fakeness in the work you do when youre being taught something and if you measure their performance its inevitable that people will exploit the difference to the point where much of what youre measuring is artifacts of the fakeness.i confess i did it myself in college. i found that in a lot of classes there might only be 20 or 30 ideas that were the right shape to make good exam questions. the way i studied for exams in these classes was not except incidentally to master the material taught in the class but to make a list of potential exam questions and work out the answers in advance. when i walked into the final the main thing id be feeling was curiosity about which of my questions would turn up on the exam. it was like a game.its not surprising that after being trained for their whole lives to play such games young founders first impulse on starting a startup is to try to figure out the tricks for winning at this new game. since fundraising appears to be the measure of success for startups another classic noob mistake they always want to know what the tricks are for convincing investors. we tell them the best way to convince investors is to make a startup thats actually doing well meaning growing fast and then simply tell investors so. then they want to know what the tricks are for growing fast. and we have to tell them the best way to do that is simply to make something people want.so many of the conversations yc partners have with young founders begin with the founder asking how do we... and the partner replying just...why do the founders always make things so complicated the reason i realized is that theyre looking for the trick.so this is the third counterintuitive thing to remember about startups starting a startup is where gaming the system stops working. gaming the system may continue to work if you go to work for a big company. depending on how broken the company is you can succeed by sucking up to the right people giving the impression of productivity and so on. 2 but that doesnt work with startups. there is no boss to trick only users and all users care about is whether your product does what they want. startups are as impersonal as physics. you have to make something people want and you prosper only to the extent you do.the dangerous thing is faking does work to some degree on investors. if youre super good at sounding like you know what youre talking about you can fool investors for at least one and perhaps even two rounds of funding. but its not in your interest to. the company is ultimately doomed. all youre doing is wasting your own time riding it down.so stop looking for the trick. there are tricks in startups as there are in any domain but they are an order of magnitude less important than solving the real problem. a founder who knows nothing about fundraising but has made something users love will have an easier time raising money than one who knows every trick in the book but has a flat usage graph. and more importantly the founder who has made something users love is the one who will go on to succeed after raising the money.though in a sense its bad news in that youre deprived of one of your most powerful weapons i think its exciting that gaming the system stops working when you start a startup. its exciting that there even exist parts of the world where you win by doing good work. imagine how depressing the world would be if it were all like school and big companies where you either have to spend a lot of time on bullshit things or lose to people who do. 3 i would have been delighted if id realized in college that there were parts of the real world where gaming the system mattered less than others and a few where it hardly mattered at all. but there are and this variation is one of the most important things to consider when youre thinking about your future. how do you win in each type of work and what would you like to win by doing 4allconsumingthat brings us to our fourth counterintuitive point startups are allconsuming. if you start a startup it will take over your life to a degree you cannot imagine. and if your startup succeeds it will take over your life for a long time for several years at the very least maybe for a decade maybe for the rest of your working life. so there is a real opportunity cost here.larry page may seem to have an enviable life but there are aspects of it that are unenviable. basically at 25 he started running as fast as he could and it must seem to him that he hasnt stopped to catch his breath since. every day new shit happens in the google empire that only the ceo can deal with and he as ceo has to deal with it. if he goes on vacation for even a week a whole weeks backlog of shit accumulates. and he has to bear this uncomplainingly partly because as the companys daddy he can never show fear or weakness and partly because billionaires get less than zero sympathy if they talk about having difficult lives. which has the strange side effect that the difficulty of being a successful startup founder is concealed from almost everyone except those whove done it.y combinator has now funded several companies that can be called big successes and in every single case the founders say the same thing. it never gets any easier. the nature of the problems change. youre worrying about construction delays at your london office instead of the broken air conditioner in your studio apartment. but the total volume of worry never decreases if anything it increases.starting a successful startup is similar to having kids in that its like a button you push that changes your life irrevocably. and while its truly wonderful having kids there are a lot of things that are easier to do before you have them than after. many of which will make you a better parent when you do have kids. and since you can delay pushing the button for a while most people in rich countries do.yet when it comes to startups a lot of people seem to think theyre supposed to start them while theyre still in college. are you crazy and what are the universities thinking they go out of their way to ensure their students are well supplied with contraceptives and yet theyre setting up entrepreneurship programs and startup incubators left and right.to be fair the universities have their hand forced here. a lot of incoming students are interested in startups. universities are at least de facto expected to prepare them for their careers. so students who want to start startups hope universities can teach them about startups. and whether universities can do this or not theres some pressure to claim they can lest they lose applicants to other universities that do.can universities teach students about startups yes and no. they can teach students about startups but as i explained before this is not what you need to know. what you need to learn about are the needs of your own users and you cant do that until you actually start the company. 5 so starting a startup is intrinsically something you can only really learn by doing it. and its impossible to do that in college for the reason i just explained startups take over your life. you cant start a startup for real as a student because if you start a startup for real youre not a student anymore. you may be nominally a student for a bit but you wont even be that for long. 6given this dichotomy which of the two paths should you take be a real student and not start a startup or start a real startup and not be a student i can answer that one for you. do not start a startup in college. how to start a startup is just a subset of a bigger problem youre trying to solve how to have a good life. and though starting a startup can be part of a good life for a lot of ambitious people age 20 is not the optimal time to do it. starting a startup is like a brutally fast depthfirst search. most people should still be searching breadthfirst at 20.you can do things in your early 20s that you cant do as well before or after like plunge deeply into projects on a whim and travel super cheaply with no sense of a deadline. for unambitious people this sort of thing is the dreaded failure to launch but for the ambitious ones it can be an incomparably valuable sort of exploration. if you start a startup at 20 and youre sufficiently successful youll never get to do it. 7mark zuckerberg will never get to bum around a foreign country. he can do other things most people cant like charter jets to fly him to foreign countries. but success has taken a lot of the serendipity out of his life. facebook is running him as much as hes running facebook. and while it can be very cool to be in the grip of a project you consider your lifes work there are advantages to serendipity too especially early in life. among other things it gives you more options to choose your lifes work from.theres not even a tradeoff here. youre not sacrificing anything if you forgo starting a startup at 20 because youre more likely to succeed if you wait. in the unlikely case that youre 20 and one of your side projects takes off like facebook did youll face a choice of running with it or not and it may be reasonable to run with it. but the usual way startups take off is for the founders to make them take off and its gratuitously stupid to do that at 20.tryshould you do it at any age i realize ive made startups sound pretty hard. if i havent let me try again starting a startup is really hard. what if its too hard how can you tell if youre up to this challengethe answer is the fifth counterintuitive point you cant tell. your life so far may have given you some idea what your prospects might be if you tried to become a mathematician or a professional football player. but unless youve had a very strange life you havent done much that was like being a startup founder. starting a startup will change you a lot. so what youre trying to estimate is not just what you are but what you could grow into and who can do thatfor the past 9 years it was my job to predict whether people would have what it took to start successful startups. it was easy to tell how smart they were and most people reading this will be over that threshold. the hard part was predicting how tough and ambitious they would become. there may be no one who has more experience at trying to predict that so i can tell you how much an expert can know about it and the answer is not much. i learned to keep a completely open mind about which of the startups in each batch would turn out to be the stars.the founders sometimes think they know. some arrive feeling sure they will ace y combinator just as theyve aced every one of the few artificial easy tests theyve faced in life so far. others arrive wondering how they got in and hoping yc doesnt discover whatever mistake caused it to accept them. but there is little correlation between founders initial attitudes and how well their companies do.ive read that the same is true in the military  that the swaggering recruits are no more likely to turn out to be really tough than the quiet ones. and probably for the same reason that the tests involved are so different from the ones in their previous lives.if youre absolutely terrified of starting a startup you probably shouldnt do it. but if youre merely unsure whether youre up to it the only way to find out is to try. just not now.ideasso if you want to start a startup one day what should you do in college there are only two things you need initially an idea and cofounders. and the m.o. for getting both is the same. which leads to our sixth and last counterintuitive point that the way to get startup ideas is not to try to think of startup ideas.ive written a whole essay on this so i wont repeat it all here. but the short version is that if you make a conscious effort to think of startup ideas the ideas you come up with will not merely be bad but bad and plausiblesounding meaning youll waste a lot of time on them before realizing theyre bad.the way to come up with good startup ideas is to take a step back. instead of making a conscious effort to think of startup ideas turn your mind into the type that startup ideas form in without any conscious effort. in fact so unconsciously that you dont even realize at first that theyre startup ideas.this is not only possible its how apple yahoo google and facebook all got started. none of these companies were even meant to be companies at first. they were all just side projects. the best startups almost have to start as side projects because great ideas tend to be such outliers that your conscious mind would reject them as ideas for companies.ok so how do you turn your mind into the type that startup ideas form in unconsciously 1 learn a lot about things that matter then 2 work on problems that interest you 3 with people you like and respect. the third part incidentally is how you get cofounders at the same time as the idea.the first time i wrote that paragraph instead of learn a lot about things that matter i wrote become good at some technology. but that prescription though sufficient is too narrow. what was special about brian chesky and joe gebbia was not that they were experts in technology. they were good at design and perhaps even more importantly they were good at organizing groups and making projects happen. so you dont have to work on technology per se so long as you work on problems demanding enough to stretch you.what kind of problems are those that is very hard to answer in the general case. history is full of examples of young people who were working on important problems that no one else at the time thought were important and in particular that their parents didnt think were important. on the other hand history is even fuller of examples of parents who thought their kids were wasting their time and who were right. so how do you know when youre working on real stuff 8i know how i know. real problems are interesting and i am selfindulgent in the sense that i always want to work on interesting things even if no one else cares about them in fact especially if no one else cares about them and find it very hard to make myself work on boring things even if theyre supposed to be important.my life is full of case after case where i worked on something just because it seemed interesting and it turned out later to be useful in some worldly way. y combinator itself was something i only did because it seemed interesting. so i seem to have some sort of internal compass that helps me out. but i dont know what other people have in their heads. maybe if i think more about this i can come up with heuristics for recognizing genuinely interesting problems but for the moment the best i can offer is the hopelessly questionbegging advice that if you have a taste for genuinely interesting problems indulging it energetically is the best way to prepare yourself for a startup. and indeed probably also the best way to live. 9but although i cant explain in the general case what counts as an interesting problem i can tell you about a large subset of them. if you think of technology as something thats spreading like a sort of fractal stain every moving point on the edge represents an interesting problem. so one guaranteed way to turn your mind into the type that has good startup ideas is to get yourself to the leading edge of some technology  to cause yourself as paul buchheit put it to live in the future. when you reach that point ideas that will seem to other people uncannily prescient will seem obvious to you. you may not realize theyre startup ideas but youll know theyre something that ought to exist.for example back at harvard in the mid 90s a fellow grad student of my friends robert and trevor wrote his own voice over ip software. he didnt mean it to be a startup and he never tried to turn it into one. he just wanted to talk to his girlfriend in taiwan without paying for long distance calls and since he was an expert on networks it seemed obvious to him that the way to do it was turn the sound into packets and ship it over the internet. he never did any more with his software than talk to his girlfriend but this is exactly the way the best startups get started.so strangely enough the optimal thing to do in college if you want to be a successful startup founder is not some sort of new vocational version of college focused on entrepreneurship. its the classic version of college as education for its own sake. if you want to start a startup after college what you should do in college is learn powerful things. and if you have genuine intellectual curiosity thats what youll naturally tend to do if you just follow your own inclinations. 10the component of entrepreneurship that really matters is domain expertise. the way to become larry page was to become an expert on search. and the way to become an expert on search was to be driven by genuine curiosity not some ulterior motive.at its best starting a startup is merely an ulterior motive for curiosity. and youll do it best if you introduce the ulterior motive toward the end of the process.so here is the ultimate advice for young wouldbe startup founders boiled down to two words just learn.notes1 some founders listen more than others and this tends to be a predictor of success. one of the things i remember about the airbnbs during yc is how intently they listened.2 in fact this is one of the reasons startups are possible. if big companies werent plagued by internal inefficiencies theyd be proportionately more effective leaving less room for startups.3 in a startup you have to spend a lot of time on schleps but this sort of work is merely unglamorous not bogus.4 what should you do if your true calling is gaming the system management consulting.5 the company may not be incorporated but if you start to get significant numbers of users youve started it whether you realize it yet or not.6 it shouldnt be that surprising that colleges cant teach students how to be good startup founders because they cant teach them how to be good employees either.the way universities teach students how to be employees is to hand off the task to companies via internship programs. but you couldnt do the equivalent thing for startups because by definition if the students did well they would never come back.7 charles darwin was 22 when he received an invitation to travel aboard the hms beagle as a naturalist. it was only because he was otherwise unoccupied to a degree that alarmed his family that he could accept it. and yet if he hadnt we probably would not know his name.8 parents can sometimes be especially conservative in this department. there are some whose definition of important problems includes only those on the critical path to med school.9 i did manage to think of a heuristic for detecting whether you have a taste for interesting ideas whether you find known boring ideas intolerable. could you endure studying literary theory or working in middle management at a large company10 in fact if your goal is to start a startup you can stick even more closely to the ideal of a liberal education than past generations have. back when students focused mainly on getting a job after college they thought at least a little about how the courses they took might look to an employer. and perhaps even worse they might shy away from taking a difficult class lest they get a low grade which would harm their allimportant gpa. good news users dont care what your gpa was. and ive never heard of investors caring either. y combinator certainly never asks what classes you took in college or what grades you got in them.

despite its title this isnt meant to be the best essay. my goal here is to figure out what the best essay would be like.it would be wellwritten but you can write well about any topic. what made it special would be what it was about.obviously some topics would be better than others. it probably wouldnt be about this years lipstick colors. but it wouldnt be vaporous talk about elevated themes either. a good essay has to be surprising. it has to tell people something they dont already know.the best essay would be on the most important topic you could tell people something surprising about.that may sound obvious but it has some unexpected consequences. one is that science enters the picture like an elephant stepping into a rowboat. for example darwin first described the idea of natural selection in an essay written in 1844. talk about an important topic you could tell people something surprising about. if thats the test of a great essay this was surely the best one written in 1844. and indeed the best possible essay at any given time would usually be one describing the most important scientific or technological discovery it was possible to make. 1another unexpected consequence i imagined when i started writing this that the best essay would be fairly timeless  that the best essay you could write in 1844 would be much the same as the best one you could write now. but in fact the opposite seems to be true. it might be true that the best painting would be timeless in this sense. but it wouldnt be impressive to write an essay introducing natural selection now. the best essay now would be one describing a great discovery we didnt yet know about.if the question of how to write the best possible essay reduces to the question of how to make great discoveries then i started with the wrong question. perhaps what this exercise shows is that we shouldnt waste our time writing essays but instead focus on making discoveries in some specific domain. but im interested in essays and what can be done with them so i want to see if theres some other question i could have asked.there is and on the face of it it seems almost identical to the one i started with. instead of asking what would the best essay be i should have asked how do you write essays well though these seem only phrasing apart their answers diverge. the answer to the first question as weve seen isnt really about essay writing. the second question forces it to be.writing essays at its best is a way of discovering ideas. how do you do that well how do you discover by writingan essay should ordinarily start with what im going to call a question though i mean this in a very general sense it doesnt have to be a question grammatically just something that acts like one in the sense that it spurs some response.how do you get this initial question it probably wont work to choose some importantsounding topic at random and go at it. professional traders wont even trade unless they have what they call an edge  a convincing story about why in some class of trades theyll win more than they lose. similarly you shouldnt attack a topic unless you have a way in  some new insight about it or way of approaching it.you dont need to have a complete thesis you just need some kind of gap you can explore. in fact merely having questions about something other people take for granted can be edge enough.if you come across a question thats sufficiently puzzling it could be worth exploring even if it doesnt seem very momentous. many an important discovery has been made by pulling on a thread that seemed insignificant at first. how can they all be finches 2once youve got a question then what you start thinking out loud about it. not literally out loud but you commit to a specific string of words in response as you would if you were talking. this initial response is usually mistaken or incomplete. writing converts your ideas from vague to bad. but thats a step forward because once you can see the brokenness you can fix it.perhaps beginning writers are alarmed at the thought of starting with something mistaken or incomplete but you shouldnt be because this is why essay writing works. forcing yourself to commit to some specific string of words gives you a starting point and if its wrong youll see that when you reread it. at least half of essay writing is rereading what youve written and asking is this correct and complete you have to be very strict when rereading not just because you want to keep yourself honest but because a gap between your response and the truth is often a sign of new ideas to be discovered.the prize for being strict with what youve written is not just refinement. when you take a roughly correct answer and try to make it exactly right sometimes you find that you cant and that the reason is that you were depending on a false assumption. and when you discard it the answer turns out to be completely different. 3ideally the response to a question is two things the first step in a process that converges on the truth and a source of additional questions in my very general sense of the word. so the process continues recursively as response spurs response. 4usually there are several possible responses to a question which means youre traversing a tree. but essays are linear not treeshaped which means you have to choose one branch to follow at each point. how do you choose usually you should follow whichever offers the greatest combination of generality and novelty. i dont consciously rank branches this way i just follow whichever seems most exciting but generality and novelty are what make a branch exciting. 5if youre willing to do a lot of rewriting you dont have to guess right. you can follow a branch and see how it turns out and if it isnt good enough cut it and backtrack. i do this all the time. in this essay ive already cut a 17paragraph subtree in addition to countless shorter ones. maybe ill reattach it at the end or boil it down to a footnote or spin it off as its own essay well see. 6in general you want to be quick to cut. one of the most dangerous temptations in writing and in software and painting is to keep something that isnt right just because it contains a few good bits or cost you a lot of effort.the most surprising new question being thrown off at this point is does it really matter what the initial question is if the space of ideas is highly connected it shouldnt because you should be able to get from any question to the most valuable ones in a few hops. and we see evidence that its highly connected in the way for example that people who are obsessed with some topic can turn any conversation toward it. but that only works if you know where you want to go and you dont in an essay. thats the whole point. you dont want to be the obsessive conversationalist or all your essays will be about the same thing. 7the other reason the initial question matters is that you usually feel somewhat obliged to stick to it. i dont think about this when i decide which branch to follow. i just follow novelty and generality. sticking to the question is enforced later when i notice ive wandered too far and have to backtrack. but i think this is the optimal solution. you dont want the hunt for novelty and generality to be constrained in the moment. go with it and see what you get. 8since the initial question does constrain you in the best case it sets an upper bound on the quality of essay youll write. if you do as well as you possibly can on the chain of thoughts that follow from the initial question the initial question itself is the only place where theres room for variation.it would be a mistake to let this make you too conservative though because you cant predict where a question will lead. not if youre doing things right because doing things right means making discoveries and by definition you cant predict those. so the way to respond to this situation is not to be cautious about which initial question you choose but to write a lot of essays. essays are for taking risks.almost any question can get you a good essay. indeed it took some effort to think of a sufficiently unpromising topic in the third paragraph because any essayists first impulse on hearing that the best essay couldnt be about x would be to try to write it. but if most questions yield good essays only some yield great ones.can we predict which questions will yield great essays considering how long ive been writing essays its alarming how novel that question feels.one thing i like in an initial question is outrageousness. i love questions that seem naughty in some way  for example by seeming counterintuitive or overambitious or heterodox. ideally all three. this essay is an example. writing about the best essay implies there is such a thing which pseudointellectuals will dismiss as reductive though it follows necessarily from the possibility of one essay being better than another. and thinking about how to do something so ambitious is close enough to doing it that it holds your attention.i like to start an essay with a gleam in my eye. this could be just a taste of mine but theres one aspect of it that probably isnt to write a really good essay on some topic you have to be interested in it. a good writer can write well about anything but to stretch for the novel insights that are the raison detre of the essay you have to care.if caring about it is one of the criteria for a good initial question then the optimal question varies from person to person. it also means youre more likely to write great essays if you care about a lot of different things. the more curious you are the greater the probable overlap between the set of things youre curious about and the set of topics that yield great essays.what other qualities would a great initial question have its probably good if it has implications in a lot of different areas. and i find its a good sign if its one that people think has already been thoroughly explored. but the truth is that ive barely thought about how to choose initial questions because i rarely do it. i rarely choose what to write about i just start thinking about something and sometimes it turns into an essay.am i going to stop writing essays about whatever i happen to be thinking about and instead start working my way through some systematically generated list of topics that doesnt sound like much fun. and yet i want to write good essays and if the initial question matters i should care about it.perhaps the answer is to go one step earlier to write about whatever pops into your head but try to ensure that what pops into your head is good. indeed now that i think about it this has to be the answer because a mere list of topics wouldnt be any use if you didnt have edge with any of them. to start writing an essay you need a topic plus some initial insight about it and you cant generate those systematically. if only. 9you can probably cause yourself to have more of them though. the quality of the ideas that come out of your head depends on what goes in and you can improve that in two dimensions breadth and depth.you cant learn everything so getting breadth implies learning about topics that are very different from one another. when i tell people about my bookbuying trips to hay and they ask what i buy books about i usually feel a bit sheepish answering because the topics seem like a laundry list of unrelated subjects. but perhaps thats actually optimal in this business.you can also get ideas by talking to people by doing and building things and by going places and seeing things. i dont think its important to talk to new people so much as the sort of people who make you have new ideas. i get more new ideas after talking for an afternoon with robert morris than from talking to 20 new smart people. i know because thats what a block of office hours at y combinator consists of.while breadth comes from reading and talking and seeing depth comes from doing. the way to really learn about some domain is to have to solve problems in it. though this could take the form of writing i suspect that to be a good essayist you also have to do or have done some other kind of work. that may not be true for most other fields but essay writing is different. you could spend half your time working on something else and be net ahead so long as it was hard.im not proposing that as a recipe so much as an encouragement to those already doing it. if youve spent all your life so far working on other things youre already halfway there. though of course to be good at writing you have to like it and if you like writing youd probably have spent at least some time doing it.everything ive said about initial questions applies also to the questions you encounter in writing the essay. theyre the same thing every subtree of an essay is usually a shorter essay just as every subtree of a calder mobile is a smaller mobile. so any technique that gets you good initial questions also gets you good whole essays.at some point the cycle of question and response reaches what feels like a natural end. which is a little suspicious shouldnt every answer suggest more questions i think what happens is that you start to feel sated. once youve covered enough interesting ground you start to lose your appetite for new questions. which is just as well because the reader is probably feeling sated too. and its not lazy to stop asking questions because you could instead be asking the initial question of a new essay.thats the ultimate source of drag on the connectedness of ideas the discoveries you make along the way. if you discover enough starting from question a youll never make it to question b. though if you keep writing essays youll gradually fix this problem by burning off such discoveries. so bizarrely enough writing lots of essays makes it as if the space of ideas were more highly connected.when a subtree comes to an end you can do one of two things. you can either stop or pull the cubist trick of laying separate subtrees end to end by returning to a question you skipped earlier. usually it requires some sleight of hand to make the essay flow continuously at this point but not this time. this time i actually need an example of the phenomenon. for example we discovered earlier that the best possible essay wouldnt usually be timeless in the way the best painting would. this seems surprising enough to be worth investigating further.there are two senses in which an essay can be timeless to be about a matter of permanent importance and always to have the same effect on readers. with art these two senses blend together. art that looked beautiful to the ancient greeks still looks beautiful to us. but with essays the two senses diverge because essays teach and you cant teach people something they already know. natural selection is certainly a matter of permanent importance but an essay explaining it couldnt have the same effect on us that it would have had on darwins contemporaries precisely because his ideas were so successful that everyone already knows about them. 10i imagined when i started writing this that the best possible essay would be timeless in the stricter evergreen sense that it would contain some deep timeless wisdom that would appeal equally to aristotle and feynman. that doesnt seem to be true. but if the best possible essay wouldnt usually be timeless in this stricter sense what would it take to write essays that werethe answer to that turns out to be very strange to be the evergreen kind of timeless an essay has to be ineffective in the sense that its discoveries arent assimilated into our shared culture. otherwise there will be nothing new in it for the second generation of readers. if you want to surprise readers not just now but in the future as well you have to write essays that wont stick  essays that no matter how good they are wont become part of what people in the future learn before they read them. 11i can imagine several ways to do that. one would be to write about things people never learn. for example its a longestablished pattern for ambitious people to chase after various types of prizes and only later perhaps too late to realize that some of them werent worth as much as they thought. if you write about that you can be confident of a conveyor belt of future readers to be surprised by it.ditto if you write about the tendency of the inexperienced to overdo things  of young engineers to produce overcomplicated solutions for example. there are some kinds of mistakes people never learn to avoid except by making them. any of those should be a timeless topic.sometimes when were slow to grasp things its not just because were obtuse or in denial but because weve been deliberately lied to. there are a lot of things adults lie to kids about and when you reach adulthood they dont take you aside and hand you a list of them. they dont remember which lies they told you and most were implicit anyway. so contradicting such lies will be a source of surprises for as long as adults keep telling them.sometimes its systems that lie to you. for example the educational systems in most countries train you to win by hacking the test. but thats not how you win at the most important realworld tests and after decades of training this is hard for new arrivals in the real world to grasp. helping them overcome such institutional lies will work as long as the institutions remain broken. 12another recipe for timelessness is to write about things readers already know but in much more detail than can be transmitted culturally. everyone knows for example that it can be rewarding to have kids. but till you have them you dont know precisely what forms that takes and even then much of what you know you may never have put into words.ive written about all these kinds of topics. but i didnt do it in a deliberate attempt to write essays that were timeless in the stricter sense. and indeed the fact that this depends on ones ideas not sticking suggests that its not worth making a deliberate attempt to. you should write about topics of timeless importance yes but if you do such a good job that your conclusions stick and future generations find your essay obvious instead of novel so much the better. youve crossed into darwin territory.writing about topics of timeless importance is an instance of something even more general though breadth of applicability. and there are more kinds of breadth than chronological  applying to lots of different fields for example. so breadth is the ultimate aim.i already aim for it. breadth and novelty are the two things im always chasing. but im glad i understand where timelessness fits.i understand better where a lot of things fit now. this essay has been a kind of tour of essay writing. i started out hoping to get advice about topics if you assume good writing the only thing left to differentiate the best essay is its topic. and i did get advice about topics discover natural selection. yeah that would be nice. but when you step back and ask whats the best you can do short of making some great discovery like that the answer turns out to be about procedure. ultimately the quality of an essay is a function of the ideas discovered in it and the way you get them is by casting a wide net for questions and then being very exacting with the answers.the most striking feature of this map of essay writing are the alternating stripes of inspiration and effort required. the questions depend on inspiration but the answers can be got by sheer persistence. you dont have to get an answer right the first time but theres no excuse for not getting it right eventually because you can keep rewriting till you do. and this is not just a theoretical possibility. its a pretty accurate description of the way i work. im rewriting as we speak.but although i wish i could say that writing great essays depends mostly on effort in the limit case its inspiration that makes the difference. in the limit case the questions are the harder thing to get. that pool has no bottom.how to get more questions that is the most important question of all.notes1 there might be some resistance to this conclusion on the grounds that some of these discoveries could only be understood by a small number of readers. but you get into all sorts of difficulties if you want to disqualify essays on this account. how do you decide where the cutoff should be if a virus kills off everyone except a handful of people sequestered at los alamos could an essay that had been disqualified now be eligible etc.darwins 1844 essay was derived from an earlier version written in 1839. extracts from it were published in 1858.2 when you find yourself very curious about an apparently minor question thats an exciting sign. evolution has designed you to pay attention to things that matter. so when youre very curious about something random that could mean youve unconsciously noticed its less random than it seems.3 corollary if youre not intellectually honest your writing wont just be biased but also boring because youll miss all the ideas youd have discovered if you pushed for the truth.4 sometimes this process begins before you start writing. sometimes youve already figured out the first few things you want to say. schoolchildren are often taught they should decide everything they want to say and write this down as an outline before they start writing the essay itself. maybe thats a good way to get them started  or not i dont know  but its antithetical to the spirit of essay writing. the more detailed your outline the less your ideas can benefit from the sort of discovery that essays are for.5 the problem with this type of greedy algorithm is that you can end up on a local maximum. if the most valuable question is preceded by a boring one youll overlook it. but i cant imagine a better strategy. theres no lookahead except by writing. so use a greedy algorithm and a lot of time.6 i ended up reattaching the first 5 of the 17 paragraphs and discarding the rest.7 stephen fry confessed to making use of this phenomenon when taking exams at oxford. he had in his head a standard essay about some general literary topic and he would find a way to turn the exam question toward it and then just reproduce it again.strictly speaking its the graph of ideas that would be highly connected not the space but that usage would confuse people who dont know graph theory whereas people who do know it will get what i mean if i say space.8 too far doesnt depend just on the distance from the original topic. its more like that distance divided by the value of whatever ive discovered in the subtree.9 or can you i should try writing about this. even if the chance of succeeding is small the expected value is huge.10 there was a vogue in the 20th century for saying that the purpose of art was also to teach. some artists tried to justify their work by explaining that their goal was not to produce something good but to challenge our preconceptions about art. and to be fair art can teach somewhat. the ancient greeks naturalistic sculptures represented a new idea and must have been extra exciting to contemporaries on that account. but they still look good to us.11 bertrand russell caused huge controversy in the early 20th century with his ideas about trial marriage. but they make boring reading now because they prevailed. trial marriage is what we call dating.12 if youd asked me 10 years ago id have predicted that schools would continue to teach hacking the test for centuries. but now it seems plausible that students will soon be taught individually by ais and that exams will be replaced by ongoing invisible microassessments.

this will come as a surprise to a lot of people but in some cases its possible to detect bias in a selection process without knowing anything about the applicant pool. which is exciting because among other things it means third parties can use this technique to detect bias whether those doing the selecting want them to or not.you can use this technique whenever a you have at least a random sample of the applicants that were selected b their subsequent performance is measured and c the groups of applicants youre comparing have roughly equal distribution of ability.how does it work think about what it means to be biased. what it means for a selection process to be biased against applicants of type x is that its harder for them to make it through. which means applicants of type x have to be better to get selected than applicants not of type x. 1 which means applicants of type x who do make it through the selection process will outperform other successful applicants. and if the performance of all the successful applicants is measured youll know if they do.of course the test you use to measure performance must be a valid one. and in particular it must not be invalidated by the bias youre trying to measure. but there are some domains where performance can be measured and in those detecting bias is straightforward. want to know if the selection process was biased against some type of applicant check whether they outperform the others. this is not just a heuristic for detecting bias. its what bias means.for example many suspect that venture capital firms are biased against female founders. this would be easy to detect among their portfolio companies do startups with female founders outperform those without a couple months ago one vc firm almost certainly unintentionally published a study showing bias of this type. first round capital found that among its portfolio companies startups with female founders outperformed those without by 63. 2the reason i began by saying that this technique would come as a surprise to many people is that we so rarely see analyses of this type. im sure it will come as a surprise to first round that they performed one. i doubt anyone there realized that by limiting their sample to their own portfolio they were producing a study not of startup trends but of their own biases when selecting companies.i predict well see this technique used more in the future. the information needed to conduct such studies is increasingly available. data about who applies for things is usually closely guarded by the organizations selecting them but nowadays data about who gets selected is often publicly available to anyone who takes the trouble to aggregate it.

technology tends to separate normal from natural. our bodies werent designed to eat the foods that people in rich countries eat or to get so little exercise. there may be a similar problem with the way we work a normal job may be as bad for us intellectually as white flour or sugar is for us physically.i began to suspect this after spending several years working with startup founders. ive now worked with over 200 of them and ive noticed a definite difference between programmers working on their own startups and those working for large organizations. i wouldnt say founders seem happier necessarily starting a startup can be very stressful. maybe the best way to put it is to say that theyre happier in the sense that your body is happier during a long run than sitting on a sofa eating doughnuts.though theyre statistically abnormal startup founders seem to be working in a way thats more natural for humans.i was in africa last year and saw a lot of animals in the wild that id only seen in zoos before. it was remarkable how different they seemed. particularly lions. lions in the wild seem about ten times more alive. theyre like different animals. i suspect that working for oneself feels better to humans in much the same way that living in the wild must feel better to a wideranging predator like a lion. life in a zoo is easier but it isnt the life they were designed for.treeswhats so unnatural about working for a big company the root of the problem is that humans werent meant to work in such large groups.another thing you notice when you see animals in the wild is that each species thrives in groups of a certain size. a herd of impalas might have 100 adults baboons maybe 20 lions rarely 10. humans also seem designed to work in groups and what ive read about huntergatherers accords with research on organizations and my own experience to suggest roughly what the ideal size is groups of 8 work well by 20 theyre getting hard to manage and a group of 50 is really unwieldy. 1whatever the upper limit is we are clearly not meant to work in groups of several hundred. and yetfor reasons having more to do with technology than human naturea great many people work for companies with hundreds or thousands of employees.companies know groups that large wouldnt work so they divide themselves into units small enough to work together. but to coordinate these they have to introduce something new bosses.these smaller groups are always arranged in a tree structure. your boss is the point where your group attaches to the tree. but when you use this trick for dividing a large group into smaller ones something strange happens that ive never heard anyone mention explicitly. in the group one level up from yours your boss represents your entire group. a group of 10 managers is not merely a group of 10 people working together in the usual way. its really a group of groups. which means for a group of 10 managers to work together as if they were simply a group of 10 individuals the group working for each manager would have to work as if they were a single personthe workers and manager would each share only one persons worth of freedom between them.in practice a group of people are never able to act as if they were one person. but in a large organization divided into groups in this way the pressure is always in that direction. each group tries its best to work as if it were the small group of individuals that humans were designed to work in. that was the point of creating it. and when you propagate that constraint the result is that each person gets freedom of action in inverse proportion to the size of the entire tree. 2anyone whos worked for a large organization has felt this. you can feel the difference between working for a company with 100 employees and one with 10000 even if your group has only 10 people.corn syrupa group of 10 people within a large organization is a kind of fake tribe. the number of people you interact with is about right. but something is missing individual initiative. tribes of huntergatherers have much more freedom. the leaders have a little more power than other members of the tribe but they dont generally tell them what to do and when the way a boss can.its not your bosss fault. the real problem is that in the group above you in the hierarchy your entire group is one virtual person. your boss is just the way that constraint is imparted to you.so working in a group of 10 people within a large organization feels both right and wrong at the same time. on the surface it feels like the kind of group youre meant to work in but something major is missing. a job at a big company is like high fructose corn syrup it has some of the qualities of things youre meant to like but is disastrously lacking in others.indeed food is an excellent metaphor to explain whats wrong with the usual sort of job.for example working for a big company is the default thing to do at least for programmers. how bad could it be well food shows that pretty clearly. if you were dropped at a random point in america today nearly all the food around you would be bad for you. humans were not designed to eat white flour refined sugar high fructose corn syrup and hydrogenated vegetable oil. and yet if you analyzed the contents of the average grocery store youd probably find these four ingredients accounted for most of the calories. normal food is terribly bad for you. the only people who eat what humans were actually designed to eat are a few birkenstockwearing weirdos in berkeley.if normal food is so bad for us why is it so common there are two main reasons. one is that it has more immediate appeal. you may feel lousy an hour after eating that pizza but eating the first couple bites feels great. the other is economies of scale. producing junk food scales producing fresh vegetables doesnt. which means a junk food can be very cheap and b its worth spending a lot to market it.if people have to choose between something thats cheap heavily marketed and appealing in the short term and something thats expensive obscure and appealing in the long term which do you think most will chooseits the same with work. the average mit graduate wants to work at google or microsoft because its a recognized brand its safe and theyll get paid a good salary right away. its the job equivalent of the pizza they had for lunch. the drawbacks will only become apparent later and then only in a vague sense of malaise.and founders and early employees of startups meanwhile are like the birkenstockwearing weirdos of berkeley though a tiny minority of the population theyre the ones living as humans are meant to. in an artificial world only extremists live naturally.programmersthe restrictiveness of big company jobs is particularly hard on programmers because the essence of programming is to build new things. sales people make much the same pitches every day support people answer much the same questions but once youve written a piece of code you dont need to write it again. so a programmer working as programmers are meant to is always making new things. and when youre part of an organization whose structure gives each person freedom in inverse proportion to the size of the tree youre going to face resistance when you do something new.this seems an inevitable consequence of bigness. its true even in the smartest companies. i was talking recently to a founder who considered starting a startup right out of college but went to work for google instead because he thought hed learn more there. he didnt learn as much as he expected. programmers learn by doing and most of the things he wanted to do he couldntsometimes because the company wouldnt let him but often because the companys code wouldnt let him. between the drag of legacy code the overhead of doing development in such a large organization and the restrictions imposed by interfaces owned by other groups he could only try a fraction of the things he would have liked to. he said he has learned much more in his own startup despite the fact that he has to do all the companys errands as well as programming because at least when hes programming he can do whatever he wants.an obstacle downstream propagates upstream. if youre not allowed to implement new ideas you stop having them. and vice versa when you can do whatever you want you have more ideas about what to do. so working for yourself makes your brain more powerful in the same way a lowrestriction exhaust system makes an engine more powerful.working for yourself doesnt have to mean starting a startup of course. but a programmer deciding between a regular job at a big company and their own startup is probably going to learn more doing the startup.you can adjust the amount of freedom you get by scaling the size of company you work for. if you start the company youll have the most freedom. if you become one of the first 10 employees youll have almost as much freedom as the founders. even a company with 100 people will feel different from one with 1000.working for a small company doesnt ensure freedom. the tree structure of large organizations sets an upper bound on freedom not a lower bound. the head of a small company may still choose to be a tyrant. the point is that a large organization is compelled by its structure to be one.consequencesthat has real consequences for both organizations and individuals. one is that companies will inevitably slow down as they grow larger no matter how hard they try to keep their startup mojo. its a consequence of the tree structure that every large organization is forced to adopt.or rather a large organization could only avoid slowing down if they avoided tree structure. and since human nature limits the size of group that can work together the only way i can imagine for larger groups to avoid tree structure would be to have no structure to have each group actually be independent and to work together the way components of a market economy do.that might be worth exploring. i suspect there are already some highly partitionable businesses that lean this way. but i dont know any technology companies that have done it.there is one thing companies can do short of structuring themselves as sponges they can stay small. if im right then it really pays to keep a company as small as it can be at every stage. particularly a technology company. which means its doubly important to hire the best people. mediocre hires hurt you twice they get less done but they also make you big because you need more of them to solve a given problem.for individuals the upshot is the same aim small. it will always suck to work for large organizations and the larger the organization the more it will suck.in an essay i wrote a couple years ago i advised graduating seniors to work for a couple years for another company before starting their own. id modify that now. work for another company if you want to but only for a small one and if you want to start your own startup go ahead.the reason i suggested college graduates not start startups immediately was that i felt most would fail. and they will. but ambitious programmers are better off doing their own thing and failing than going to work at a big company. certainly theyll learn more. they might even be better off financially. a lot of people in their early twenties get into debt because their expenses grow even faster than the salary that seemed so high when they left school. at least if you start a startup and fail your net worth will be zero rather than negative. 3weve now funded so many different types of founders that we have enough data to see patterns and there seems to be no benefit from working for a big company. the people whove worked for a few years do seem better than the ones straight out of college but only because theyre that much older.the people who come to us from big companies often seem kind of conservative. its hard to say how much is because big companies made them that way and how much is the natural conservatism that made them work for the big companies in the first place. but certainly a large part of it is learned. i know because ive seen it burn off.having seen that happen so many times is one of the things that convinces me that working for oneself or at least for a small group is the natural way for programmers to live. founders arriving at y combinator often have the downtrodden air of refugees. three months later theyre transformed they have so much more confidence that they seem as if theyve grown several inches taller. 4 strange as this sounds they seem both more worried and happier at the same time. which is exactly how id describe the way lions seem in the wild.watching employees get transformed into founders makes it clear that the difference between the two is due mostly to environmentand in particular that the environment in big companies is toxic to programmers. in the first couple weeks of working on their own startup they seem to come to life because finally theyre working the way people are meant to.notes1 when i talk about humans being meant or designed to live a certain way i mean by evolution.2 its not only the leaves who suffer. the constraint propagates up as well as down. so managers are constrained too instead of just doing things they have to act through subordinates.3 do not finance your startup with credit cards. financing a startup with debt is usually a stupid move and credit card debt stupidest of all. credit card debt is a bad idea period. it is a trap set by evil companies for the desperate and the foolish.4 the founders we fund used to be younger initially we encouraged undergrads to apply and the first couple times i saw this i used to wonder if they were actually getting physically taller.

great cities attract ambitious people. you can sense it when you walk around one. in a hundred subtle ways the city sends you a message you could do more you should try harder.the surprising thing is how different these messages can be. new york tells you above all you should make more money. there are other messages too of course. you should be hipper. you should be better looking. but the clearest message is that you should be richer.what i like about boston or rather cambridge is that the message there is you should be smarter. you really should get around to reading all those books youve been meaning to.when you ask what message a city sends you sometimes get surprising answers. as much as they respect brains in silicon valley the message the valley sends is you should be more powerful.thats not quite the same message new york sends. power matters in new york too of course but new york is pretty impressed by a billion dollars even if you merely inherited it. in silicon valley no one would care except a few real estate agents. what matters in silicon valley is how much effect you have on the world. the reason people there care about larry and sergey is not their wealth but the fact that they control google which affects practically everyone.how much does it matter what message a city sends empirically the answer seems to be a lot. you might think that if you had enough strength of mind to do great things youd be able to transcend your environment. where you live should make at most a couple percent difference. but if you look at the historical evidence it seems to matter more than that. most people who did great things were clumped together in a few places where that sort of thing was done at the time.you can see how powerful cities are from something i wrote about earlier the case of the milanese leonardo. practically every fifteenth century italian painter youve heard of was from florence even though milan was just as big. people in florence werent genetically different so you have to assume there was someone born in milan with as much natural ability as leonardo. what happened to himif even someone with the same natural ability as leonardo couldnt beat the force of environment do you suppose you cani dont. im fairly stubborn but i wouldnt try to fight this force. id rather use it. so ive thought a lot about where to live.id always imagined berkeley would be the ideal place  that it would basically be cambridge with good weather. but when i finally tried living there a couple years ago it turned out not to be. the message berkeley sends is you should live better. life in berkeley is very civilized. its probably the place in america where someone from northern europe would feel most at home. but its not humming with ambition.in retrospect it shouldnt have been surprising that a place so pleasant would attract people interested above all in quality of life. cambridge with good weather it turns out is not cambridge. the people you find in cambridge are not there by accident. you have to make sacrifices to live there. its expensive and somewhat grubby and the weathers often bad. so the kind of people you find in cambridge are the kind of people who want to live where the smartest people are even if that means living in an expensive grubby place with bad weather.as of this writing cambridge seems to be the intellectual capital of the world. i realize that seems a preposterous claim. what makes it true is that its more preposterous to claim about anywhere else. american universities currently seem to be the best judging from the flow of ambitious students. and what us city has a stronger claim new york a fair number of smart people but diluted by a much larger number of neanderthals in suits. the bay area has a lot of smart people too but again diluted there are two great universities but theyre far apart. harvard and mit are practically adjacent by west coast standards and theyre surrounded by about 20 other colleges and universities. 1cambridge as a result feels like a town whose main industry is ideas while new yorks is finance and silicon valleys is startups.when you talk about cities in the sense we are what youre really talking about is collections of people. for a long time cities were the only large collections of people so you could use the two ideas interchangeably. but we can see how much things are changing from the examples ive mentioned. new york is a classic great city. but cambridge is just part of a city and silicon valley is not even that. san jose is not as it sometimes claims the capital of silicon valley. its just 178 square miles at one end of it.maybe the internet will change things further. maybe one day the most important community you belong to will be a virtual one and it wont matter where you live physically. but i wouldnt bet on it. the physical world is very high bandwidth and some of the ways cities send you messages are quite subtle.one of the exhilarating things about coming back to cambridge every spring is walking through the streets at dusk when you can see into the houses. when you walk through palo alto in the evening you see nothing but the blue glow of tvs. in cambridge you see shelves full of promisinglooking books. palo alto was probably much like cambridge in 1960 but youd never guess now that there was a university nearby. now its just one of the richer neighborhoods in silicon valley. 2a city speaks to you mostly by accident  in things you see through windows in conversations you overhear. its not something you have to seek out but something you cant turn off. one of the occupational hazards of living in cambridge is overhearing the conversations of people who use interrogative intonation in declarative sentences. but on average ill take cambridge conversations over new york or silicon valley ones.a friend who moved to silicon valley in the late 90s said the worst thing about living there was the low quality of the eavesdropping. at the time i thought she was being deliberately eccentric. sure it can be interesting to eavesdrop on people but is good quality eavesdropping so important that it would affect where you chose to live now i understand what she meant. the conversations you overhear tell you what sort of people youre among.no matter how determined you are its hard not to be influenced by the people around you. its not so much that you do whatever a city expects of you but that you get discouraged when no one around you cares about the same things you do.theres an imbalance between encouragement and discouragement like that between gaining and losing money. most people overvalue negative amounts of money theyll work much harder to avoid losing a dollar than to gain one. similarly although there are plenty of people strong enough to resist doing something just because thats what one is supposed to do where they happen to be there are few strong enough to keep working on something no one around them cares about.because ambitions are to some extent incompatible and admiration is a zerosum game each city tends to focus on one type of ambition. the reason cambridge is the intellectual capital is not just that theres a concentration of smart people there but that theres nothing else people there care about more. professors in new york and the bay area are second class citizens  till they start hedge funds or startups respectively.this suggests an answer to a question people in new york have wondered about since the bubble whether new york could grow into a startup hub to rival silicon valley. one reason thats unlikely is that someone starting a startup in new york would feel like a second class citizen. 3 theres already something else people in new york admire more.in the long term that could be a bad thing for new york. the power of an important new technology does eventually convert to money. so by caring more about money and less about power than silicon valley new york is recognizing the same thing but slower. 4 and in fact it has been losing to silicon valley at its own game the ratio of new york to california residents in the forbes 400 has decreased from 1.45 8156 when the list was first published in 1982 to .83 7388 in 2007.not all cities send a message. only those that are centers for some type of ambition do. and it can be hard to tell exactly what message a city sends without living there. i understand the messages of new york cambridge and silicon valley because ive lived for several years in each of them. dc and la seem to send messages too but i havent spent long enough in either to say for sure what they are.the big thing in la seems to be fame. theres an a list of people who are most in demand right now and whats most admired is to be on it or friends with those who are. beneath that the message is much like new yorks though perhaps with more emphasis on physical attractiveness.in dc the message seems to be that the most important thing is who you know. you want to be an insider. in practice this seems to work much as in la. theres an a list and you want to be on it or close to those who are. the only difference is how the a list is selected. and even that is not that different.at the moment san franciscos message seems to be the same as berkeleys you should live better. but this will change if enough startups choose sf over the valley. during the bubble that was a predictor of failure  a selfindulgent choice like buying expensive office furniture. even now im suspicious when startups choose sf. but if enough good ones do it stops being a selfindulgent choice because the center of gravity of silicon valley will shift there.i havent found anything like cambridge for intellectual ambition. oxford and cambridge england feel like ithaca or hanover the message is there but not as strong.paris was once a great intellectual center. if you went there in 1300 it might have sent the message cambridge does now. but i tried living there for a bit last year and the ambitions of the inhabitants are not intellectual ones. the message paris sends now is do things with style. i liked that actually. paris is the only city ive lived in where people genuinely cared about art. in america only a few rich people buy original art and even the more sophisticated ones rarely get past judging it by the brand name of the artist. but looking through windows at dusk in paris you can see that people there actually care what paintings look like. visually paris has the best eavesdropping i know. 5theres one more message ive heard from cities in london you can still barely hear the message that one should be more aristocratic. if you listen for it you can also hear it in paris new york and boston. but this message is everywhere very faint. it would have been strong 100 years ago but now i probably wouldnt have picked it up at all if i hadnt deliberately tuned in to that wavelength to see if there was any signal left.so far the complete list of messages ive picked up from cities is wealth style hipness physical attractiveness fame political power economic power intelligence social class and quality of life.my immediate reaction to this list is that it makes me slightly queasy. id always considered ambition a good thing but i realize now that was because id always implicitly understood it to mean ambition in the areas i cared about. when you list everything ambitious people are ambitious about its not so pretty.on closer examination i see a couple things on the list that are surprising in the light of history. for example physical attractiveness wouldnt have been there 100 years ago though it might have been 2400 years ago. it has always mattered for women but in the late twentieth century it seems to have started to matter for men as well. im not sure why  probably some combination of the increasing power of women the increasing influence of actors as models and the fact that so many people work in offices now you cant show off by wearing clothes too fancy to wear in a factory so you have to show off with your body instead.hipness is another thing you wouldnt have seen on the list 100 years ago. or wouldnt you what it means is to know whats what. so maybe it has simply replaced the component of social class that consisted of being au fait. that could explain why hipness seems particularly admired in london its version 2 of the traditional english delight in obscure codes that only insiders understand.economic power would have been on the list 100 years ago but what we mean by it is changing. it used to mean the control of vast human and material resources. but increasingly it means the ability to direct the course of technology and some of the people in a position to do that are not even rich  leaders of important open source projects for example. the captains of industry of times past had laboratories full of clever people cooking up new technologies for them. the new breed are themselves those people.as this force gets more attention another is dropping off the list social class. i think the two changes are related. economic power wealth and social class are just names for the same thing at different stages in its life economic power converts to wealth and wealth to social class. so the focus of admiration is simply shifting upstream.does anyone who wants to do great work have to live in a great city no all great cities inspire some sort of ambition but they arent the only places that do. for some kinds of work all you need is a handful of talented colleagues.what cities provide is an audience and a funnel for peers. these arent so critical in something like math or physics where no audience matters except your peers and judging ability is sufficiently straightforward that hiring and admissions committees can do it reliably. in a field like math or physics all you need is a department with the right colleagues in it. it could be anywhere  in los alamos new mexico for example.its in fields like the arts or writing or technology that the larger environment matters. in these the best practitioners arent conveniently collected in a few top university departments and research labs  partly because talent is harder to judge and partly because people pay for these things so one doesnt need to rely on teaching or research funding to support oneself. its in these more chaotic fields that it helps most to be in a great city you need the encouragement of feeling that people around you care about the kind of work you do and since you have to find peers for yourself you need the much larger intake mechanism of a great city.you dont have to live in a great city your whole life to benefit from it. the critical years seem to be the early and middle ones of your career. clearly you dont have to grow up in a great city. nor does it seem to matter if you go to college in one. to most college students a world of a few thousand people seems big enough. plus in college you dont yet have to face the hardest kind of work  discovering new problems to solve.its when you move on to the next and much harder step that it helps most to be in a place where you can find peers and encouragement. you seem to be able to leave if you want once youve found both. the impressionists show the typical pattern they were born all over france pissarro was born in the carribbean and died all over france but what defined them were the years they spent together in paris.unless youre sure what you want to do and where the leading center for it is your best bet is probably to try living in several places when youre young. you can never tell what message a city sends till you live there or even whether it still sends one. often your information will be wrong i tried living in florence when i was 25 thinking it would be an art center but it turned out i was 450 years too late.even when a city is still a live center of ambition you wont know for sure whether its message will resonate with you till you hear it. when i moved to new york i was very excited at first. its an exciting place. so it took me quite a while to realize i just wasnt like the people there. i kept searching for the cambridge of new york. it turned out it was way way uptown an hour uptown by air.some people know at 16 what sort of work theyre going to do but in most ambitious kids ambition seems to precede anything specific to be ambitious about. they know they want to do something great. they just havent decided yet whether theyre going to be a rock star or a brain surgeon. theres nothing wrong with that. but it means if you have this most common type of ambition youll probably have to figure out where to live by trial and error. youll probably have to find the city where you feel at home to know what sort of ambition you have.notes1 this is one of the advantages of not having the universities in your country controlled by the government. when governments decide how to allocate resources political dealmaking causes things to be spread out geographically. no central goverment would put its two best universities in the same town unless it was the capital which would cause other problems. but scholars seem to like to cluster together as much as people in any other field and when given the freedom to they derive the same advantages from it.2 there are still a few old professors in palo alto but one by one they die and their houses are transformed by developers into mcmansions and sold to vps of bus dev.3 how many times have you read about startup founders who continued to live inexpensively as their companies took off who continued to dress in jeans and tshirts to drive the old car they had in grad school and so on if you did that in new york people would treat you like shit. if you walk into a fancy restaurant in san francisco wearing a jeans and a tshirt theyre nice to you who knows who you might be not in new york.one sign of a citys potential as a technology center is the number of restaurants that still require jackets for men. according to zagats there are none in san francisco la boston or seattle 4 in dc 6 in chicago 8 in london 13 in new york and 20 in paris.zagats lists the ritz carlton dining room in sf as requiring jackets but i couldnt believe it so i called to check and in fact they dont. apparently theres only one restaurant left on the entire west coast that still requires jackets the french laundry in napa valley.4 ideas are one step upstream from economic power so its conceivable that intellectual centers like cambridge will one day have an edge over silicon valley like the one the valley has over new york.this seems unlikely at the moment if anything boston is falling further and further behind. the only reason i even mention the possibility is that the path from ideas to startups has recently been getting smoother. its a lot easier now for a couple of hackers with no business experience to start a startup than it was 10 years ago. if you extrapolate another 20 years maybe the balance of power will start to shift back. i wouldnt bet on it but i wouldnt bet against it either.5 if paris is where people care most about art why is new york the center of gravity of the art business because in the twentieth century art as brand split apart from art as stuff. new york is where the richest buyers are but all they demand from art is brand and since you can base brand on anything with a sufficiently identifiable style you may as well use the local stuff.

one of the most revealing ways to classify people is by the degree and aggressiveness of their conformism. imagine a cartesian coordinate system whose horizontal axis runs from conventionalminded on the left to independentminded on the right and whose vertical axis runs from passive at the bottom to aggressive at the top. the resulting four quadrants define four types of people. starting in the upper left and going counterclockwise aggressively conventionalminded passively conventionalminded passively independentminded and aggressively independentminded.i think that youll find all four types in most societies and that which quadrant people fall into depends more on their own personality than the beliefs prevalent in their society. 1young children offer some of the best evidence for both points. anyone whos been to primary school has seen the four types and the fact that school rules are so arbitrary is strong evidence that which quadrant people fall into depends more on them than the rules.the kids in the upper left quadrant the aggressively conventionalminded ones are the tattletales. they believe not only that rules must be obeyed but that those who disobey them must be punished.the kids in the lower left quadrant the passively conventionalminded are the sheep. theyre careful to obey the rules but when other kids break them their impulse is to worry that those kids will be punished not to ensure that they will.the kids in the lower right quadrant the passively independentminded are the dreamy ones. they dont care much about rules and probably arent 100 sure what the rules even are.and the kids in the upper right quadrant the aggressively independentminded are the naughty ones. when they see a rule their first impulse is to question it. merely being told what to do makes them inclined to do the opposite.when measuring conformism of course you have to say with respect to what and this changes as kids get older. for younger kids its the rules set by adults. but as kids get older the source of rules becomes their peers. so a pack of teenagers who all flout school rules in the same way are not independentminded rather the opposite.in adulthood we can recognize the four types by their distinctive calls much as you could recognize four species of birds. the call of the aggressively conventionalminded is crush outgroup its rather alarming to see an exclamation point after a variable but thats the whole problem with the aggressively conventionalminded. the call of the passively conventionalminded is what will the neighbors think the call of the passively independentminded is to each his own. and the call of the aggressively independentminded is eppur si muove.the four types are not equally common. there are more passive people than aggressive ones and far more conventionalminded people than independentminded ones. so the passively conventionalminded are the largest group and the aggressively independentminded the smallest.since ones quadrant depends more on ones personality than the nature of the rules most people would occupy the same quadrant even if theyd grown up in a quite different society.princeton professor robert george recently wrotei sometimes ask students what their position on slavery would have been had they been white and living in the south before abolition. guess what they all would have been abolitionists they all would have bravely spoken out against slavery and worked tirelessly against it.hes too polite to say so but of course they wouldnt. and indeed our default assumption should not merely be that his students would on average have behaved the same way people did at the time but that the ones who are aggressively conventionalminded today would have been aggressively conventionalminded then too. in other words that theyd not only not have fought against slavery but that theyd have been among its staunchest defenders.im biased i admit but it seems to me that aggressively conventionalminded people are responsible for a disproportionate amount of the trouble in the world and that a lot of the customs weve evolved since the enlightenment have been designed to protect the rest of us from them. in particular the retirement of the concept of heresy and its replacement by the principle of freely debating all sorts of different ideas even ones that are currently considered unacceptable without any punishment for those who try them out to see if they work. 2why do the independentminded need to be protected though because they have all the new ideas. to be a successful scientist for example its not enough just to be right. you have to be right when everyone else is wrong. conventionalminded people cant do that. for similar reasons all successful startup ceos are not merely independentminded but aggressively so. so its no coincidence that societies prosper only to the extent that they have customs for keeping the conventionalminded at bay. 3in the last few years many of us have noticed that the customs protecting free inquiry have been weakened. some say were overreacting  that they havent been weakened very much or that theyve been weakened in the service of a greater good. the latter ill dispose of immediately. when the conventionalminded get the upper hand they always say its in the service of a greater good. it just happens to be a different incompatible greater good each time.as for the former worry that the independentminded are being oversensitive and that free inquiry hasnt been shut down that much you cant judge that unless you are yourself independentminded. you cant know how much of the space of ideas is being lopped off unless you have them and only the independentminded have the ones at the edges. precisely because of this they tend to be very sensitive to changes in how freely one can explore ideas. theyre the canaries in this coalmine.the conventionalminded say as they always do that they dont want to shut down the discussion of all ideas just the bad ones.youd think it would be obvious just from that sentence what a dangerous game theyre playing. but ill spell it out. there are two reasons why we need to be able to discuss even bad ideas.the first is that any process for deciding which ideas to ban is bound to make mistakes. all the more so because no one intelligent wants to undertake that kind of work so it ends up being done by the stupid. and when a process makes a lot of mistakes you need to leave a margin for error. which in this case means you need to ban fewer ideas than youd like to. but thats hard for the aggressively conventionalminded to do partly because they enjoy seeing people punished as they have since they were children and partly because they compete with one another. enforcers of orthodoxy cant allow a borderline idea to exist because that gives other enforcers an opportunity to oneup them in the moral purity department and perhaps even to turn enforcer upon them. so instead of getting the margin for error we need we get the opposite a race to the bottom in which any idea that seems at all bannable ends up being banned. 4the second reason its dangerous to ban the discussion of ideas is that ideas are more closely related than they look. which means if you restrict the discussion of some topics it doesnt only affect those topics. the restrictions propagate back into any topic that yields implications in the forbidden ones. and that is not an edge case. the best ideas do exactly that they have consequences in fields far removed from their origins. having ideas in a world where some ideas are banned is like playing soccer on a pitch that has a minefield in one corner. you dont just play the same game you would have but on a different shaped pitch. you play a much more subdued game even on the ground thats safe.in the past the way the independentminded protected themselves was to congregate in a handful of places  first in courts and later in universities  where they could to some extent make their own rules. places where people work with ideas tend to have customs protecting free inquiry for the same reason wafer fabs have powerful air filters or recording studios good sound insulation. for the last couple centuries at least when the aggressively conventionalminded were on the rampage for whatever reason universities were the safest places to be.that may not work this time though due to the unfortunate fact that the latest wave of intolerance began in universities. it began in the mid 1980s and by 2000 seemed to have died down but it has recently flared up again with the arrival of social media. this seems unfortunately to have been an own goal by silicon valley. though the people who run silicon valley are almost all independentminded theyve handed the aggressively conventionalminded a tool such as they could only have dreamed of.on the other hand perhaps the decline in the spirit of free inquiry within universities is as much the symptom of the departure of the independentminded as the cause. people who would have become professors 50 years ago have other options now. now they can become quants or start startups. you have to be independentminded to succeed at either of those. if these people had been professors theyd have put up a stiffer resistance on behalf of academic freedom. so perhaps the picture of the independentminded fleeing declining universities is too gloomy. perhaps the universities are declining because so many have already left. 5though ive spent a lot of time thinking about this situation i cant predict how it plays out. could some universities reverse the current trend and remain places where the independentminded want to congregate or will the independentminded gradually abandon them i worry a lot about what we might lose if that happened.but im hopeful long term. the independentminded are good at protecting themselves. if existing institutions are compromised theyll create new ones. that may require some imagination. but imagination is after all their specialty.notes1 i realize of course that if peoples personalities vary in any two ways you can use them as axes and call the resulting four quadrants personality types. so what im really claiming is that the axes are orthogonal and that theres significant variation in both.2 the aggressively conventionalminded arent responsible for all the trouble in the world. another big source of trouble is the sort of charismatic leader who gains power by appealing to them. they become much more dangerous when such leaders emerge.3 i never worried about writing things that offended the conventionalminded when i was running y combinator. if yc were a cookie company id have faced a difficult moral choice. conventionalminded people eat cookies too. but they dont start successful startups. so if i deterred them from applying to yc the only effect was to save us work reading applications.4 there has been progress in one area the punishments for talking about banned ideas are less severe than in the past. theres little danger of being killed at least in richer countries. the aggressively conventionalminded are mostly satisfied with getting people fired.5 many professors are independentminded  especially in math the hard sciences and engineering where you have to be to succeed. but students are more representative of the general population and thus mostly conventionalminded. so when professors and students are in conflict its not just a conflict between generations but also between different types of people.

someone we funded is talking to vcs now and asked me how common it was for a startups founders to retain control of the board after a series a round. he said vcs told him this almost never happened.ten years ago that was true. in the past founders rarely kept control of the board through a series a. the traditional series a board consisted of two founders two vcs and one independent member. more recently the recipe is often one founder one vc and one independent. in either case the founders lose their majority.but not always. mark zuckerberg kept control of facebooks board through the series a and still has it today. mark pincus has kept control of zyngas too. but are these just outliers how common is it for founders to keep control after an a round id heard of several cases among the companies weve funded but i wasnt sure how many there were so i emailed the ycfounders list.the replies surprised me. in a dozen companies weve funded the founders still had a majority of the board seats after the series a round.i feel like were at a tipping point here. a lot of vcs still act as if founders retaining board control after a series a is unheardof. a lot of them try to make you feel bad if you even ask  as if youre a noob or a control freak for wanting such a thing. but the founders i heard from arent noobs or control freaks. or if they are they are like mark zuckerberg the kind of noobs and control freaks vcs should be trying to fund more of.founders retaining control after a series a is clearly heardof. and barring financial catastrophe i think in the coming year it will become the norm.control of a company is a more complicated matter than simply outvoting other parties in board meetings. investors usually get vetos over certain big decisions like selling the company regardless of how many board seats they have. and board votes are rarely split. matters are decided in the discussion preceding the vote not in the vote itself which is usually unanimous. but if opinion is divided in such discussions the side that knows it would lose in a vote will tend to be less insistent. thats what board control means in practice. you dont simply get to do whatever you want the board still has to act in the interest of the shareholders but if you have a majority of board seats then your opinion about whats in the interest of the shareholders will tend to prevail.so while board control is not total control its not imaginary either. theres inevitably a difference in how things feel within the company. which means if it becomes the norm for founders to retain board control after a series a that will change the way things feel in the whole startup world.the switch to the new norm may be surprisingly fast because the startups that can retain control tend to be the best ones. theyre the ones that set the trends both for other startups and for vcs.a lot of the reason vcs are harsh when negotiating with startups is that theyre embarrassed to go back to their partners looking like they got beaten. when they sign a termsheet they want to be able to brag about the good terms they got. a lot of them dont care that much personally about whether founders keep board control. they just dont want to seem like they had to make concessions. which means if letting the founders keep control stops being perceived as a concession it will rapidly become much more common.like a lot of changes that have been forced on vcs this change wont turn out to be as big a problem as they might think. vcs will still be able to convince they just wont be able to compel. and the startups where they have to resort to compulsion are not the ones that matter anyway. vcs make most of their money from a few big hits and those arent them.knowing that founders will keep control of the board may even help vcs pick better. if they know they cant fire the founders theyll have to choose founders they can trust. and thats who they should have been choosing all along.

about twenty years ago people noticed computers and tv were on a collision course and started to speculate about what theyd produce when they converged. we now know the answer computers. its clear now that even by using the word convergence we were giving tv too much credit. this wont be convergence so much as replacement. people may still watch things they call tv shows but theyll watch them mostly on computers.what decided the contest for computers four forces three of which one could have predicted and one that would have been harder to.one predictable cause of victory is that the internet is an open platform. anyone can build whatever they want on it and the market picks the winners. so innovation happens at hacker speeds instead of big company speeds.the second is moores law which has worked its usual magic on internet bandwidth. 1the third reason computers won is piracy. users prefer it not just because its free but because its more convenient. bittorrent and youtube have already trained a new generation of viewers that the place to watch shows is on a computer screen. 2the somewhat more surprising force was one specific type of innovation social applications. the average teenage kid has a pretty much infinite capacity for talking to their friends. but they cant physically be with them all the time. when i was in high school the solution was the telephone. now its social networks multiplayer games and various messaging applications. the way you reach them all is through a computer. 3 which means every teenage kid a wants a computer with an internet connection b has an incentive to figure out how to use it and c spends countless hours in front of it.this was the most powerful force of all. this was what made everyone want computers. nerds got computers because they liked them. then gamers got them to play games on. but it was connecting to other people that got everyone else thats what made even grandmas and 14 year old girls want computers.after decades of running an iv drip right into their audience people in the entertainment business had understandably come to think of them as rather passive. they thought theyd be able to dictate the way shows reached audiences. but they underestimated the force of their desire to connect with one another.facebook killed tv. that is wildly oversimplified of course but probably as close to the truth as you can get in three words.the tv networks already seem grudgingly to see where things are going and have responded by putting their stuff grudgingly online. but theyre still dragging their heels. they still seem to wish people would watch shows on tv instead just as newspapers that put their stories online still seem to wish people would wait till the next morning and read them printed on paper. they should both just face the fact that the internet is the primary medium.theyd be in a better position if theyd done that earlier. when a new medium arises thats powerful enough to make incumbents nervous then its probably powerful enough to win and the best thing they can do is jump in immediately.whether they like it or not big changes are coming because the internet dissolves the two cornerstones of broadcast media synchronicity and locality. on the internet you dont have to send everyone the same signal and you dont have to send it to them from a local source. people will watch what they want when they want it and group themselves according to whatever shared interest they feel most strongly. maybe their strongest shared interest will be their physical location but im guessing not. which means local tv is probably dead. it was an artifact of limitations imposed by old technology. if someone were creating an internetbased tv company from scratch now they might have some plan for shows aimed at specific regions but it wouldnt be a top priority.synchronicity and locality are tied together. tv network affiliates care whats on at 10 because that delivers viewers for local news at 11. this connection adds more brittleness than strength however people dont watch whats on at 10 because they want to watch the news afterward.tv networks will fight these trends because they dont have sufficient flexibility to adapt to them. theyre hemmed in by local affiliates in much the same way car companies are hemmed in by dealers and unions. inevitably the people running the networks will take the easy route and try to keep the old model running for a couple more years just as the record labels have done.a recent article in the wall street journal described how tv networks were trying to add more live shows partly as a way to make viewers watch tv synchronously instead of watching recorded shows when it suited them. instead of delivering what viewers want theyre trying to force them to change their habits to suit the networks obsolete business model. that never works unless you have a monopoly or cartel to enforce it and even then it only works temporarily.the other reason networks like live shows is that theyre cheaper to produce. there they have the right idea but they havent followed it to its conclusion. live content can be way cheaper than networks realize and the way to take advantage of dramatic decreases in cost is to increase volume. the networks are prevented from seeing this whole line of reasoning because they still think of themselves as being in the broadcast businessas sending one signal to everyone. 4now would be a good time to start any company that competes with tv networks. thats what a lot of internet startups are though they may not have had this as an explicit goal. people only have so many leisure hours a day and tv is premised on such long sessions unlike google which prides itself on sending users on their way quickly that anything that takes up their time is competing with it. but in addition to such indirect competitors i think tv companies will increasingly face direct ones.even in cable tv the long tail was lopped off prematurely by the threshold you had to get over to start a new channel. it will be longer on the internet and there will be more mobility within it. in this new world the existing players will only have the advantages any big company has in its market.that will change the balance of power between the networks and the people who produce shows. the networks used to be gatekeepers. they distributed your work and sold advertising on it. now the people who produce a show can distribute it themselves. the main value networks supply now is ad sales. which will tend to put them in the position of service providers rather than publishers.shows will change even more. on the internet theres no reason to keep their current format or even the fact that they have a single format. indeed the more interesting sort of convergence thats coming is between shows and games. but on the question of what sort of entertainment gets distributed on the internet in 20 years i wouldnt dare to make any predictions except that things will change a lot. well get whatever the most imaginative people can cook up. thats why the internet won.notes1 thanks to trevor blackwell for this point. he adds i remember the eyes of phone companies gleaming in the early 90s when they talked about convergence. they thought most programming would be on demand and they would implement it and make a lot of money. it didnt work out. they assumed that their local network infrastructure would be critical to do video ondemand because you couldnt possibly stream it from a few data centers over the internet. at the time 1992 the entire crosscountry internet bandwidth wasnt enough for one video stream. but widearea bandwidth increased more than they expected and they were beaten by itunes and hulu.2 copyright owners tend to focus on the aspect they see of piracy which is the lost revenue. they therefore think what drives users to do it is the desire to get something for free. but itunes shows that people will pay for stuff online if you make it easy. a significant component of piracy is simply that it offers a better user experience.3 or a phone that is actually a computer. im not making any predictions about the size of the device that will replace tv just that it will have a browser and get data via the internet.4 emmett shear writes id argue the long tail for sports may be even larger than the long tail for other kinds of content. anyone can broadcast a high school football game that will be interesting to 10000 people or so even if the quality of production is not so good.

when people hurt themselves lifting heavy things its usually because they try to lift with their back. the right way to lift heavy things is to let your legs do the work. inexperienced founders make the same mistake when trying to convince investors. they try to convince with their pitch. most would be better off if they let their startup do the work  if they started by understanding why their startup is worth investing in then simply explained this well to investors.investors are looking for startups that will be very successful. but that test is not as simple as it sounds. in startups as in a lot of other domains the distribution of outcomes follows a power law but in startups the curve is startlingly steep. the big successes are so big they dwarf the rest. and since there are only a handful each year the conventional wisdom is 15 investors treat big success as if it were binary. most are interested in you if you seem like you have a chance however small of being one of the 15 big successes and otherwise not. 1there are a handful of angels whod be interested in a company with a high probability of being moderately successful. but angel investors like big successes too.how do you seem like youll be one of the big successes you need three things formidable founders a promising market and usually some evidence of success so far.formidablethe most important ingredient is formidable founders. most investors decide in the first few minutes whether you seem like a winner or a loser and once their opinion is set its hard to change. 2 every startup has reasons both to invest and not to invest. if investors think youre a winner they focus on the former and if not they focus on the latter. for example it might be a rich market but with a slow sales cycle. if investors are impressed with you as founders they say they want to invest because its a rich market and if not they say they cant invest because of the slow sales cycle.theyre not necessarily trying to mislead you. most investors are genuinely unclear in their own minds why they like or dislike startups. if you seem like a winner theyll like your idea more. but dont be too smug about this weakness of theirs because you have it too almost everyone does.there is a role for ideas of course. theyre fuel for the fire that starts with liking the founders. once investors like you youll see them reaching for ideas theyll be saying yes and you could also do x. whereas when they dont like you theyll be saying but what about ybut the foundation of convincing investors is to seem formidable and since this isnt a word most people use in conversation much i should explain what it means. a formidable person is one who seems like theyll get what they want regardless of whatever obstacles are in the way. formidable is close to confident except that someone could be confident and mistaken. formidable is roughly justifiably confident.there are a handful of people who are really good at seeming formidable  some because they actually are very formidable and just let it show and others because they are more or less con artists. 3 but most founders including many who will go on to start very successful companies are not that good at seeming formidable the first time they try fundraising. what should they do 4what they should not do is try to imitate the swagger of more experienced founders. investors are not always that good at judging technology but theyre good at judging confidence. if you try to act like something youre not youll just end up in an uncanny valley. youll depart from sincere but never arrive at convincing.truththe way to seem most formidable as an inexperienced founder is to stick to the truth. how formidable you seem isnt a constant. it varies depending on what youre saying. most people can seem confident when theyre saying one plus one is two because they know its true. the most diffident person would be puzzled and even slightly contemptuous if they told a vc one plus one is two and the vc reacted with skepticism. the magic ability of people who are good at seeming formidable is that they can do this with the sentence were going to make a billion dollars a year. but you can do the same if not with that sentence with some fairly impressive ones so long as you convince yourself first.thats the secret. convince yourself that your startup is worth investing in and then when you explain this to investors theyll believe you. and by convince yourself i dont mean play mind games with yourself to boost your confidence. i mean truly evaluate whether your startup is worth investing in. if it isnt dont try to raise money. 5 but if it is youll be telling the truth when you tell investors its worth investing in and theyll sense that. you dont have to be a smooth presenter if you understand something well and tell the truth about it.to evaluate whether your startup is worth investing in you have to be a domain expert. if youre not a domain expert you can be as convinced as you like about your idea and it will seem to investors no more than an instance of the dunningkruger effect. which in fact it will usually be. and investors can tell fairly quickly whether youre a domain expert by how well you answer their questions. know everything about your market. 6why do founders persist in trying to convince investors of things theyre not convinced of themselves partly because weve all been trained to.when my friends robert morris and trevor blackwell were in grad school one of their fellow students was on the receiving end of a question from their faculty advisor that we still quote today. when the unfortunate fellow got to his last slide the professor burst outwhich one of these conclusions do you actually believeone of the artifacts of the way schools are organized is that we all get trained to talk even when we have nothing to say. if you have a ten page paper due then ten pages you must write even if you only have one page of ideas. even if you have no ideas. you have to produce something. and all too many startups go into fundraising in the same spirit. when they think its time to raise money they try gamely to make the best case they can for their startup. most never think of pausing beforehand to ask whether what theyre saying is actually convincing because theyve all been trained to treat the need to present as a given  as an area of fixed size over which however much truth they have must needs be spread however thinly.the time to raise money is not when you need it or when you reach some artificial deadline like a demo day. its when you can convince investors and not before. 7and unless youre a good con artist youll never convince investors if youre not convinced yourself. theyre far better at detecting bullshit than you are at producing it even if youre producing it unknowingly. if you try to convince investors before youve convinced yourself youll be wasting both your time.but pausing first to convince yourself will do more than save you from wasting your time. it will force you to organize your thoughts. to convince yourself that your startup is worth investing in youll have to figure out why its worth investing in. and if you can do that youll end up with more than added confidence. youll also have a provisional roadmap of how to succeed.marketnotice ive been careful to talk about whether a startup is worth investing in rather than whether its going to succeed. no one knows whether a startup is going to succeed. and its a good thing for investors that this is so because if you could know in advance whether a startup would succeed the stock price would already be the future price and there would be no room for investors to make money. startup investors know that every investment is a bet and against pretty long odds.so to prove youre worth investing in you dont have to prove youre going to succeed just that youre a sufficiently good bet. what makes a startup a sufficiently good bet in addition to formidable founders you need a plausible path to owning a big piece of a big market. founders think of startups as ideas but investors think of them as markets. if there are x number of customers whod pay an average of y per year for what youre making then the total addressable market or tam of your company is xy. investors dont expect you to collect all that money but its an upper bound on how big you can get.your target market has to be big and it also has to be capturable by you. but the market doesnt have to be big yet nor do you necessarily have to be in it yet. indeed its often better to start in a small market that will either turn into a big one or from which you can move into a big one. there just has to be some plausible sequence of hops that leads to dominating a big market a few years down the line.the standard of plausibility varies dramatically depending on the age of the startup. a three month old company at demo day only needs to be a promising experiment thats worth funding to see how it turns out. whereas a two year old company raising a series a round needs to be able to show the experiment worked. 8but every company that gets really big is lucky in the sense that their growth is due mostly to some external wave theyre riding so to make a convincing case for becoming huge you have to identify some specific trend youll benefit from. usually you can find this by asking why now if this is such a great idea why hasnt someone else already done it ideally the answer is that it only recently became a good idea because something changed and no one else has noticed yet.microsoft for example was not going to grow huge selling basic interpreters. but by starting there they were perfectly poised to expand up the stack of microcomputer software as microcomputers grew powerful enough to support one. and microcomputers turned out to be a really huge wave bigger than even the most optimistic observers would have predicted in 1975.but while microsoft did really well and there is thus a temptation to think they would have seemed a great bet a few months in they probably didnt. good but not great. no company however successful ever looks more than a pretty good bet a few months in. microcomputers turned out to be a big deal and microsoft both executed well and got lucky. but it was by no means obvious that this was how things would play out. plenty of companies seem as good a bet a few months in. i dont know about startups in general but at least half the startups we fund could make as good a case as microsoft could have for being on a path to dominating a large market. and who can reasonably expect more of a startup than thatrejectionif you can make as good a case as microsoft could have will you convince investors not always. a lot of vcs would have rejected microsoft. 9 certainly some rejected google. and getting rejected will put you in a slightly awkward position because as youll see when you start fundraising the most common question youll get from investors will be who else is investing what do you say if youve been fundraising for a while and no one has committed yet 10the people who are really good at acting formidable often solve this problem by giving investors the impression that while no investors have committed yet several are about to. this is arguably a permissible tactic. its slightly dickish of investors to care more about who else is investing than any other aspect of your startup and misleading them about how far along you are with other investors seems the complementary countermove. its arguably an instance of scamming a scammer. but i dont recommend this approach to most founders because most founders wouldnt be able to carry it off. this is the single most common lie told to investors and you have to be really good at lying to tell members of some profession the most common lie theyre told.if youre not a master of negotiation and perhaps even if you are the best solution is to tackle the problem headon and to explain why investors have turned you down and why theyre mistaken. if you know youre on the right track then you also know why investors were wrong to reject you. experienced investors are well aware that the best ideas are also the scariest. they all know about the vcs who rejected google. if instead of seeming evasive and ashamed about having been turned down and thereby implicitly agreeing with the verdict you talk candidly about what scared investors about you youll seem more confident which they like and youll probably also do a better job of presenting that aspect of your startup. at the very least that worry will now be out in the open instead of being a gotcha left to be discovered by the investors youre currently talking to who will be proud of and thus attached to their discovery. 11this strategy will work best with the best investors who are both hard to bluff and who already believe most other investors are conventionalminded drones doomed always to miss the big outliers. raising money is not like applying to college where you can assume that if you can get into mit you can also get into foobar state. because the best investors are much smarter than the rest and the best startup ideas look initially like bad ideas its not uncommon for a startup to be rejected by all the vcs except the best ones. thats what happened to dropbox. y combinator started in boston and for the first 3 years we ran alternating batches in boston and silicon valley. because boston investors were so few and so timid we used to ship boston batches out for a second demo day in silicon valley. dropbox was part of a boston batch which means all those boston investors got the first look at dropbox and none of them closed the deal. yet another backup and syncing thing they all thought. a couple weeks later dropbox raised a series a round from sequoia. 12differentnot understanding that investors view investments as bets combines with the ten page paper mentality to prevent founders from even considering the possibility of being certain of what theyre saying. they think theyre trying to convince investors of something very uncertain  that their startup will be huge  and convincing anyone of something like that must obviously entail some wild feat of salesmanship. but in fact when you raise money youre trying to convince investors of something so much less speculative  whether the company has all the elements of a good bet  that you can approach the problem in a qualitatively different way. you can convince yourself then convince them.and when you convince them use the same matteroffact language you used to convince yourself. you wouldnt use vague grandiose marketingspeak among yourselves. dont use it with investors either. it not only doesnt work on them but seems a mark of incompetence. just be concise. many investors explicitly use that as a test reasoning correctly that if you cant explain your plans concisely you dont really understand them. but even investors who dont have a rule about this will be bored and frustrated by unclear explanations. 13so heres the recipe for impressing investors when youre not already good at seeming formidablemake something worth investing in.understand why its worth investing in.explain that clearly to investors.if youre saying something you know is true youll seem confident when youre saying it. conversely never let pitching draw you into bullshitting. as long as you stay on the territory of truth youre strong. make the truth good then just tell it.notes1 theres no reason to believe this number is a constant. in fact its our explicit goal at y combinator to increase it by encouraging people to start startups who otherwise wouldnt have.2 or more precisely investors decide whether youre a loser or possibly a winner. if you seem like a winner they may then depending on how much youre raising have several more meetings with you to test whether that initial impression holds up.but if you seem like a loser theyre done at least for the next year or so. and when they decide youre a loser they usually decide in way less than the 50 minutes they may have allotted for the first meeting. which explains the astonished stories one always hears about vc inattentiveness. how could these people make investment decisions well when theyre checking their messages during startups presentations the solution to that mystery is that theyve already made the decision.3 the two are not mutually exclusive. there are people who are both genuinely formidable and also really good at acting that way.4 how can people who will go on to create giant companies not seem formidable early on i think the main reason is that their experience so far has trained them to keep their wings folded as it were. family school and jobs encourage cooperation not conquest. and its just as well they do because even being genghis khan is probably 99 cooperation. but the result is that most people emerge from the tube of their upbringing in their early twenties compressed into the shape of the tube. some find they have wings and start to spread them. but this takes a few years. in the beginning even they dont know yet what theyre capable of.5 in fact change what youre doing. youre investing your own time in your startup. if youre not convinced that what youre working on is a sufficiently good bet why are you even working on that6 when investors ask you a question you dont know the answer to the best response is neither to bluff nor give up but instead to explain how youd figure out the answer. if you can work out a preliminary answer on the spot so much the better but explain thats what youre doing.7 at yc we try to ensure startups are ready to raise money on demo day by encouraging them to ignore investors and instead focus on their companies till about a week before. that way most reach the stage where theyre sufficiently convincing well before demo day. but not all do so we also give any startup that wants to the option of deferring to a later demo day.8 founders are often surprised by how much harder it is to raise the next round. there is a qualitative difference in investors attitudes. its like the difference between being judged as a kid and as an adult. the next time you raise money its not enough to be promising. you have to be delivering results.so although it works well to show growth graphs at either stage investors treat them differently. at three months a growth graph is mostly evidence that the founders are effective. at two years it has to be evidence of a promising market and a company tuned to exploit it.9 by this i mean that if the present day equivalent of the 3 month old microsoft presented at a demo day there would be investors who turned them down. microsoft itself didnt raise outside money and indeed the venture business barely existed when they got started in 1975.10 the best investors rarely care who else is investing but mediocre investors almost all do. so you can use this question as a test of investor quality.11 to use this technique youll have to find out why investors who rejected you did so or at least what they claim was the reason. that may require asking because investors dont always volunteer a lot of detail. make it clear when you ask that youre not trying to dispute their decision  just that if there is some weakness in your plans you need to know about it. you wont always get a real reason out of them but you should at least try.12 dropbox wasnt rejected by all the east coast vcs. there was one firm that wanted to invest but tried to lowball them.13 alfred lin points out that its doubly important for the explanation of a startup to be clear and concise because it has to convince at one remove it has to work not just on the partner you talk to but when that partner retells it to colleagues.we consciously optimize for this at yc. when we work with founders create a demo day pitch the last step is to imagine how an investor would sell it to colleagues.

corporate development aka corp dev is the group within companies that buys other companies. if youre talking to someone from corp dev thats why whether you realize it yet or not.its usually a mistake to talk to corp dev unless a you want to sell your company right now and b youre sufficiently likely to get an offer at an acceptable price. in practice that means startups should only talk to corp dev when theyre either doing really well or really badly. if youre doing really badly meaning the company is about to die you may as well talk to them because you have nothing to lose. and if youre doing really well you can safely talk to them because you both know the price will have to be high and if they show the slightest sign of wasting your time youll be confident enough to tell them to get lost.the danger is to companies in the middle. particularly to young companies that are growing fast but havent been doing it for long enough to have grown big yet. its usually a mistake for a promising company less than a year old even to talk to corp dev.but its a mistake founders constantly make. when someone from corp dev wants to meet the founders tell themselves they should at least find out what they want. besides they dont want to offend big company by refusing to meet.well ill tell you what they want. they want to talk about buying you. thats what the title corp dev means. so before agreeing to meet with someone from corp dev ask yourselves do we want to sell the company right now and if the answer is no tell them sorry but were focusing on growing the company. they wont be offended. and certainly the founders of big company wont be offended. if anything theyll think more highly of you. youll remind them of themselves. they didnt sell either thats why theyre in a position now to buy other companies. 1most founders who get contacted by corp dev already know what it means. and yet even when they know what corp dev does and know they dont want to sell they take the meeting. why do they do it the same mix of denial and wishful thinking that underlies most mistakes founders make. its flattering to talk to someone who wants to buy you. and who knows maybe their offer will be surprisingly high. you should at least see what it is rightno. if they were going to send you an offer immediately by email sure you might as well open it. but that is not how conversations with corp dev work. if you get an offer at all it will be at the end of a long and unbelievably distracting process. and if the offer is surprising it will be surprisingly low.distractions are the thing you can least afford in a startup. and conversations with corp dev are the worst sort of distraction because as well as consuming your attention they undermine your morale. one of the tricks to surviving a grueling process is not to stop and think how tired you are. instead you get into a sort of flow. 2 imagine what it would do to you if at mile 20 of a marathon someone ran up beside you and said you must feel really tired. would you like to stop and take a rest conversations with corp dev are like that but worse because the suggestion of stopping gets combined in your mind with the imaginary high price you think theyll offer.and then youre really in trouble. if they can corp dev people like to turn the tables on you. they like to get you to the point where youre trying to convince them to buy instead of them trying to convince you to sell. and surprisingly often they succeed.this is a very slippery slope greased with some of the most powerful forces that can work on founders minds and attended by an experienced professional whose full time job is to push you down it.their tactics in pushing you down that slope are usually fairly brutal. corp dev peoples whole job is to buy companies and they dont even get to choose which. the only way their performance is measured is by how cheaply they can buy you and the more ambitious ones will stop at nothing to achieve that. for example theyll almost always start with a lowball offer just to see if youll take it. even if you dont a low initial offer will demoralize you and make you easier to manipulate.and that is the most innocent of their tactics. just wait till youve agreed on a price and think you have a done deal and then they come back and say their boss has vetoed the deal and wont do it for more than half the agreed upon price. happens all the time. if you think investors can behave badly its nothing compared to what corp dev people can do. even corp dev people at companies that are otherwise benevolent.i remember once complaining to a friend at google about some nasty trick their corp dev people had pulled on a yc startup.what happened to dont be evil i asked.i dont think corp dev got the memo he replied.the tactics you encounter in ma conversations can be like nothing youve experienced in the otherwise comparatively upstanding world of silicon valley. its as if a chunk of genetic material from the oldfashioned robber baron business world got incorporated into the startup world. 3the simplest way to protect yourself is to use the trick that john d. rockefeller whose grandfather was an alcoholic used to protect himself from becoming one. he once told a sunday school classboys do you know why i never became a drunkard because i never took the first drink.do you want to sell your company right now not eventually right now. if not just dont take the first meeting. they wont be offended. and you in turn will be guaranteed to be spared one of the worst experiences that can happen to a startup.if you do want to sell theres another set of techniques for doing that. but the biggest mistake founders make in dealing with corp dev is not doing a bad job of talking to them when theyre ready to but talking to them before they are. so if you remember only the title of this essay you already know most of what you need to know about ma in the first year.notes1 im not saying you should never sell. im saying you should be clear in your own mind about whether you want to sell or not and not be led by manipulation or wishful thinking into trying to sell earlier than you otherwise would have.2 in a startup as in most competitive sports the task at hand almost does this for you youre too busy to feel tired. but when you lose that protection e.g. at the final whistle the fatigue hits you like a wave. to talk to corp dev is to let yourself feel it midgame.3 to be fair the apparent misdeeds of corp dev people are magnified by the fact that they function as the face of a large organization that often doesnt know its own mind. acquirers can be surprisingly indecisive about acquisitions and their flakiness is indistinguishable from dishonesty by the time it filters down to you.

coronavirus and credibilityapril 2020i recently saw a video of tv journalists and politicians confidently saying that the coronavirus would be no worse than the flu. what struck me about it was not just how mistaken they seemed but how daring. how could they feel safe saying such thingsthe answer i realized is that they didnt think they could get caught. they didnt realize there was any danger in making false predictions. these people constantly make false predictions and get away with it because the things they make predictions about either have mushy enough outcomes that they can bluster their way out of trouble or happen so far in the future that few remember what they said.an epidemic is different. it falsifies your predictions rapidly and unequivocally.but epidemics are rare enough that these people clearly didnt realize this was even a possibility. instead they just continued to use their ordinary m.o. which as the epidemic has made clear is to talk confidently about things they dont understand.an event like this is thus a uniquely powerful way of taking peoples measure. as warren buffett said its only when the tide goes out that you learn whos been swimming naked. and the tide has just gone out like never before.now that weve seen the results lets remember what we saw because this is the most accurate test of credibility were ever likely to have. i hope.

december 2008a few months ago i read a new york times article on south korean cram schools that saidadmission to the right university can make or break an ambitious young south korean.a parent addedin our country college entrance exams determine 70 to 80 percent of a persons future.it was striking how old fashioned this sounded. and yet when i was in high school it wouldnt have seemed too far off as a description of the us. which means things must have been changing here.the course of peoples lives in the us now seems to be determined less by credentials and more by performance than it was 25 years ago. where you go to college still matters but not like it used to.what happenedjudging people by their academic credentials was in its time an advance. the practice seems to have begun in china where starting in 587 candidates for the imperial civil service had to take an exam on classical literature. 1 it was also a test of wealth because the knowledge it tested was so specialized that passing required years of expensive training. but though wealth was a necessary condition for passing it was not a sufficient one. by the standards of the rest of the world in 587 the chinese system was very enlightened. europeans didnt introduce formal civil service exams till the nineteenth century and even then they seem to have been influenced by the chinese example.before credentials government positions were obtained mainly by family influence if not outright bribery. it was a great step forward to judge people by their performance on a test. but by no means a perfect solution. when you judge people that way you tend to get cram schoolswhich they did in ming china and nineteenth century england just as much as in present day south korea.what cram schools are in effect is leaks in a seal. the use of credentials was an attempt to seal off the direct transmission of power between generations and cram schools represent that power finding holes in the seal. cram schools turn wealth in one generation into credentials in the next.its hard to beat this phenomenon because the schools adjust to suit whatever the tests measure. when the tests are narrow and predictable you get cram schools on the classic model like those that prepared candidates for sandhurst the british west point or the classes american students take now to improve their sat scores. but as the tests get broader the schools do too. preparing a candidate for the chinese imperial civil service exams took years as prep school does today. but the raison detre of all these institutions has been the same to beat the system. 2history suggests that all other things being equal a society prospers in proportion to its ability to prevent parents from influencing their childrens success directly. its a fine thing for parents to help their children indirectlyfor example by helping them to become smarter or more disciplined which then makes them more successful. the problem comes when parents use direct methods when they are able to use their own wealth or power as a substitute for their childrens qualities.parents will tend to do this when they can. parents will die for their kids so its not surprising to find theyll also push their scruples to the limits for them. especially if other parents are doing it.sealing off this force has a double advantage. not only does a society get the best man for the job but parents ambitions are diverted from direct methods to indirect onesto actually trying to raise their kids well.but we should expect it to be very hard to contain parents efforts to obtain an unfair advantage for their kids. were dealing with one of the most powerful forces in human nature. we shouldnt expect naive solutions to work any more than wed expect naive solutions for keeping heroin out of a prison to work.the obvious way to solve the problem is to make credentials better. if the tests a society uses are currently hackable we can study the way people beat them and try to plug the holes. you can use the cram schools to show you where most of the holes are. they also tell you when youre succeeding in fixing them when cram schools become less popular.a more general solution would be to push for increased transparency especially at critical social bottlenecks like college admissions. in the us this process still shows many outward signs of corruption. for example legacy admissions. the official story is that legacy status doesnt carry much weight because all it does is break ties applicants are bucketed by ability and legacy status is only used to decide between the applicants in the bucket that straddles the cutoff. but what this means is that a university can make legacy status have as much or as little weight as they want by adjusting the size of the bucket that straddles the cutoff.by gradually chipping away at the abuse of credentials you could probably make them more airtight. but what a long fight it would be. especially when the institutions administering the tests dont really want them to be airtight.fortunately theres a better way to prevent the direct transmission of power between generations. instead of trying to make credentials harder to hack we can also make them matter less.lets think about what credentials are for. what they are functionally is a way of predicting performance. if you could measure actual performance you wouldnt need them.so why did they even evolve why havent we just been measuring actual performance think about where credentialism first appeared in selecting candidates for large organizations. individual performance is hard to measure in large organizations and the harder performance is to measure the more important it is to predict it. if an organization could immediately and cheaply measure the performance of recruits they wouldnt need to examine their credentials. they could take everyone and keep just the good ones.large organizations cant do this. but a bunch of small organizations in a market can come close. a market takes every organization and keeps just the good ones. as organizations get smaller this approaches taking every person and keeping just the good ones. so all other things being equal a society consisting of more smaller organizations will care less about credentials.thats whats been happening in the us. thats why those quotes from korea sound so old fashioned. theyre talking about an economy like americas a few decades ago dominated by a few big companies. the route for the ambitious in that sort of environment is to join one and climb to the top. credentials matter a lot then. in the culture of a large organization an elite pedigree becomes a selffulfilling prophecy.this doesnt work in small companies. even if your colleagues were impressed by your credentials theyd soon be parted from you if your performance didnt match because the company would go out of business and the people would be dispersed.in a world of small companies performance is all anyone cares about. people hiring for a startup dont care whether youve even graduated from college let alone which one. all they care about is what you can do. which is in fact all that should matter even in a large organization. the reason credentials have such prestige is that for so long the large organizations in a society tended to be the most powerful. but in the us at least they dont have the monopoly on power they once did precisely because they cant measure and thus reward individual performance. why spend twenty years climbing the corporate ladder when you can get rewarded directly by the marketi realize i see a more exaggerated version of the change than most other people. as a partner at an early stage venture funding firm im like a jumpmaster shoving people out of the old world of credentials and into the new one of performance. im an agent of the change im seeing. but i dont think im imagining it. it was not so easy 25 years ago for an ambitious person to choose to be judged directly by the market. you had to go through bosses and they were influenced by where youd been to college.what made it possible for small organizations to succeed in america im still not entirely sure. startups are certainly a large part of it. small organizations can develop new ideas faster than large ones and new ideas are increasingly valuable.but i dont think startups account for all the shift from credentials to measurement. my friend julian weber told me that when he went to work for a new york law firm in the 1950s they paid associates far less than firms do today. law firms then made no pretense of paying people according to the value of the work theyd done. pay was based on seniority. the younger employees were paying their dues. theyd be rewarded later.the same principle prevailed at industrial companies. when my father was working at westinghouse in the 1970s he had people working for him who made more than he did because theyd been there longer.now companies increasingly have to pay employees market price for the work they do. one reason is that employees no longer trust companies to deliver deferred rewards why work to accumulate deferred rewards at a company that might go bankrupt or be taken over and have all its implicit obligations wiped out the other is that some companies broke ranks and started to pay young employees large amounts. this was particularly true in consulting law and finance where it led to the phenomenon of yuppies. the word is rarely used today because its no longer surprising to see a 25 year old with money but in 1985 the sight of a 25 year old professional able to afford a new bmw was so novel that it called forth a new word.the classic yuppie worked for a small organization. he didnt work for general widget but for the law firm that handled general widgets acquisitions or the investment bank that floated their bond issues.startups and yuppies entered the american conceptual vocabulary roughly simultaneously in the late 1970s and early 1980s. i dont think there was a causal connection. startups happened because technology started to change so fast that big companies could no longer keep a lid on the smaller ones. i dont think the rise of yuppies was inspired by it it seems more as if there was a change in the social conventions and perhaps the laws governing the way big companies worked. but the two phenomena rapidly fused to produce a principle that now seems obvious paying energetic young people market rates and getting correspondingly high performance from them.at about the same time the us economy rocketed out of the doldrums that had afflicted it for most of the 1970s. was there a connection i dont know enough to say but it felt like it at the time. there was a lot of energy released.countries worried about their competitiveness are right to be concerned about the number of startups started within them. but they would do even better to examine the underlying principle. do they let energetic young people get paid market rate for the work they do the young are the test because when people arent rewarded according to performance theyre invariably rewarded according to seniority instead.all it takes is a few beachheads in your economy that pay for performance. measurement spreads like heat. if one part of a society is better at measurement than others it tends to push the others to do better. if people who are young but smart and driven can make more by starting their own companies than by working for existing ones the existing companies are forced to pay more to keep them. so market rates gradually permeate every organization even the government. 3the measurement of performance will tend to push even the organizations issuing credentials into line. when we were kids i used to annoy my sister by ordering her to do things i knew she was about to do anyway. as credentials are superseded by performance a similar role is the best former gatekeepers can hope for. once credential granting institutions are no longer in the selffullfilling prophecy business theyll have to work harder to predict the future.credentials are a step beyond bribery and influence. but theyre not the final step. theres an even better way to block the transmission of power between generations to encourage the trend toward an economy made of more smaller units. then you can measure what credentials merely predict.no one likes the transmission of power between generationsnot the left or the right. but the market forces favored by the right turn out to be a better way of preventing it than the credentials the left are forced to fall back on.the era of credentials began to end when the power of large organizations peaked in the late twentieth century. now we seem to be entering a new era based on measurement. the reason the new model has advanced so rapidly is that it works so much better. it shows no sign of slowing.

like all investors we spend a lot of time trying to learn how to predict which startups will succeed. we probably spend more time thinking about it than most because we invest the earliest. prediction is usually all we have to rely on.we learned quickly that the most important predictor of success is determination. at first we thought it might be intelligence. everyone likes to believe thats what makes startups succeed. it makes a better story that a company won because its founders were so smart. the pr people and reporters who spread such stories probably believe them themselves. but while it certainly helps to be smart its not the deciding factor. there are plenty of people as smart as bill gates who achieve nothing.in most domains talent is overrated compared to determinationpartly because it makes a better story partly because it gives onlookers an excuse for being lazy and partly because after a while determination starts to look like talent.i cant think of any field in which determination is overrated but the relative importance of determination and talent probably do vary somewhat. talent probably matters more in types of work that are purer in the sense that one is solving mostly a single type of problem instead of many different types. i suspect determination would not take you as far in math as it would in say organized crime.i dont mean to suggest by this comparison that types of work that depend more on talent are always more admirable. most people would agree its more admirable to be good at math than memorizing long strings of digits even though the latter depends more on natural ability.perhaps one reason people believe startup founders win by being smarter is that intelligence does matter more in technology startups than it used to in earlier types of companies. you probably do need to be a bit smarter to dominate internet search than you had to be to dominate railroads or hotels or newspapers. and thats probably an ongoing trend. but even in the highest of high tech industries success still depends more on determination than brains.if determination is so important can we isolate its components are some more important than others are there some you can cultivatethe simplest form of determination is sheer willfulness. when you want something you must have it no matter what.a good deal of willfulness must be inborn because its common to see families where one sibling has much more of it than another. circumstances can alter it but at the high end of the scale nature seems to be more important than nurture. bad circumstances can break the spirit of a strongwilled person but i dont think theres much you can do to make a weakwilled person strongerwilled.being strongwilled is not enough however. you also have to be hard on yourself. someone who was strongwilled but selfindulgent would not be called determined. determination implies your willfulness is balanced by discipline.that word balance is a significant one. the more willful you are the more disciplined you have to be. the stronger your will the less anyone will be able to argue with you except yourself. and someone has to argue with you because everyone has base impulses and if you have more will than discipline youll just give into them and end up on a local maximum like drug addiction.we can imagine will and discipline as two fingers squeezing a slippery melon seed. the harder they squeeze the further the seed flies but they must both squeeze equally or the seed spins off sideways.if this is true it has interesting implications because discipline can be cultivated and in fact does tend to vary quite a lot in the course of an individuals life. if determination is effectively the product of will and discipline then you can become more determined by being more disciplined. 1another consequence of the melon seed model is that the more willful you are the more dangerous it is to be undisciplined. there seem to be plenty of examples to confirm that. in some very energetic peoples lives you see something like wing flutter where they alternate between doing great work and doing absolutely nothing. externally this would look a lot like bipolar disorder.the melon seed model is inaccurate in at least one respect however its static. in fact the dangers of indiscipline increase with temptation. which means interestingly that determination tends to erode itself. if youre sufficiently determined to achieve great things this will probably increase the number of temptations around you. unless you become proportionally more disciplined willfulness will then get the upper hand and your achievement will revert to the mean.thats why shakespeares caesar thought thin men so dangerous. they werent tempted by the minor perquisites of power.the melon seed model implies its possible to be too disciplined. is it i think there probably are people whose willfulness is crushed down by excessive discipline and who would achieve more if they werent so hard on themselves. one reason the young sometimes succeed where the old fail is that they dont realize how incompetent they are. this lets them do a kind of deficit spending. when they first start working on something they overrate their achievements. but that gives them confidence to keep working and their performance improves. whereas someone clearereyed would see their initial incompetence for what it was and perhaps be discouraged from continuing.theres one other major component of determination ambition. if willfulness and discipline are what get you to your destination ambition is how you choose it.i dont know if its exactly right to say that ambition is a component of determination but theyre not entirely orthogonal. it would seem a misnomer if someone said they were very determined to do something trivially easy.and fortunately ambition seems to be quite malleable theres a lot you can do to increase it. most people dont know how ambitious to be especially when theyre young. they dont know whats hard or what theyre capable of. and this problem is exacerbated by having few peers. ambitious people are rare so if everyone is mixed together randomly as they tend to be early in peoples lives then the ambitious ones wont have many ambitious peers. when you take people like this and put them together with other ambitious people they bloom like dying plants given water. probably most ambitious people are starved for the sort of encouragement theyd get from ambitious peers whatever their age. 2achievements also tend to increase your ambition. with each step you gain confidence to stretch further next time.so here in sum is how determination seems to work it consists of willfulness balanced with discipline aimed by ambition. and fortunately at least two of these three qualities can be cultivated. you may be able to increase your strength of will somewhat you can definitely learn selfdiscipline and almost everyone is practically malnourished when it comes to ambition.i feel like i understand determination a bit better now. but only a bit willfulness discipline and ambition are all concepts almost as complicated as determination. 3note too that determination and talent are not the whole story. theres a third factor in achievement how much you like the work. if you really love working on something you dont need determination to drive you its what youd do anyway. but most types of work have aspects one doesnt like because most types of work consist of doing things for other people and its very unlikely that the tasks imposed by their needs will happen to align exactly with what you want to do.indeed if you want to create the most wealth the way to do it is to focus more on their needs than your interests and make up the difference with determination.notes1 loosely speaking. what im claiming with the melon seed model is more like determination is proportionate to wdm  kw  dn where w is will and d discipline.2 which means one of the best ways to help a society generally is to create events and institutions that bring ambitious people together. its like pulling the control rods out of a reactor the energy they emit encourages other ambitious people instead of being absorbed by the normal people theyre usually surrounded with.conversely its probably a mistake to do as some european countries have done and try to ensure none of your universities is significantly better than the others.3 for example willfulness clearly has two subcomponents stubbornness and energy. the first alone yields someone whos stubbornly inert. the second alone yields someone flighty. as willful people get older or otherwise lose their energy they tend to become merely stubborn.

because biographies of famous scientists tend to edit out their mistakes we underestimate the degree of risk they were willing to take. and because anything a famous scientist did that wasnt a mistake has probably now become the conventional wisdom those choices dont seem risky either.biographies of newton for example understandably focus more on physics than alchemy or theology. the impression we get is that his unerring judgment led him straight to truths no one else had noticed. how to explain all the time he spent on alchemy and theology well smart people are often kind of crazy.but maybe there is a simpler explanation. maybe the smartness and the craziness were not as separate as we think. physics seems to us a promising thing to work on and alchemy and theology obvious wastes of time. but thats because we know how things turned out. in newtons day the three problems seemed roughly equally promising. no one knew yet what the payoff would be for inventing what we now call physics if they had more people would have been working on it. and alchemy and theology were still then in the category marc andreessen would describe as huge if true.newton made three bets. one of them worked. but they were all risky.

when meeting people you dont know very well the convention is to seem extra friendly. you smile and say pleased to meet you whether you are or not. theres nothing dishonest about this. everyone knows that these little social lies arent meant to be taken literally just as everyone knows that can you pass the salt is only grammatically a question.im perfectly willing to smile and say pleased to meet you when meeting new people. but there is another set of customs for being ingratiating in print that are not so harmless.the reason theres a convention of being ingratiating in print is that most essays are written to persuade. and as any politician could tell you the way to persuade people is not just to baldly state the facts. you have to add a spoonful of sugar to make the medicine go down.for example a politician announcing the cancellation of a government program will not merely say the program is canceled. that would seem offensively curt. instead hell spend most of his time talking about the noble effort made by the people who worked on it.the reason these conventions are more dangerous is that they interact with the ideas. saying pleased to meet you is just something you prepend to a conversation but the sort of spin added by politicians is woven through it. were starting to move from social lies to real lies.heres an example of a paragraph from an essay i wrote about labor unions. as written it tends to offend people who like unions.people who think the labor movement was the creation of heroic union organizers have a problem to explain why are unions shrinking now the best they can do is fall back on the default explanation of people living in fallen civilizations. our ancestors were giants. the workers of the early twentieth century must have had a moral courage thats lacking today.now heres the same paragraph rewritten to please instead of offending themearly union organizers made heroic sacrifices to improve conditions for workers. but though labor unions are shrinking now its not because present union leaders are any less courageous. an employer couldnt get away with hiring thugs to beat up union leaders today but if they did i see no reason to believe todays union leaders would shrink from the challenge. so i think it would be a mistake to attribute the decline of unions to some kind of decline in the people who run them. early union leaders were heroic certainly but we should not suppose that if unions have declined its because present union leaders are somehow inferior. the cause must be external. 1it makes the same point that it cant have been the personal qualities of early union organizers that made unions successful but must have been some external factor or otherwise presentday union leaders would have to be inferior people. but written this way it seems like a defense of presentday union organizers rather than an attack on early ones. that makes it more persuasive to people who like unions because it seems sympathetic to their cause.i believe everything i wrote in the second version. early union leaders did make heroic sacrifices. and present union leaders probably would rise to the occasion if necessary. people tend to im skeptical about the idea of the greatest generation. 2if i believe everything i said in the second version why didnt i write it that way why offend people needlesslybecause id rather offend people than pander to them and if you write about controversial topics you have to choose one or the other. the degree of courage of past or present union leaders is beside the point all that matters for the argument is that theyre the same. but if you want to please people who are mistaken you cant simply tell the truth. youre always going to have to add some sort of padding to protect their misconceptions from bumping against reality.most writers do. most writers write to persuade if only out of habit or politeness. but i dont write to persuade i write to figure out. i write to persuade a hypothetical perfectly unbiased reader.since the custom is to write to persuade the actual reader someone who doesnt will seem arrogant. in fact worse than arrogant since readers are used to essays that try to please someone an essay that displeases one side in a dispute reads as an attempt to pander to the other. to a lot of prounion readers the first paragraph sounds like the sort of thing a rightwing radio talk show host would say to stir up his followers. but its not. something that curtly contradicts ones beliefs can be hard to distinguish from a partisan attack on them but though they can end up in the same place they come from different sources.would it be so bad to add a few extra words to make people feel better maybe not. maybe im excessively attached to conciseness. i write code the same way i write essays making pass after pass looking for anything i can cut. but i have a legitimate reason for doing this. you dont know what the ideas are until you get them down to the fewest words. 3the danger of the second paragraph is not merely that its longer. its that you start to lie to yourself. the ideas start to get mixed together with the spin youve added to get them past the readers misconceptions.i think the goal of an essay should be to discover surprising things. thats my goal at least. and most surprising means most different from what people currently believe. so writing to persuade and writing to discover are diametrically opposed. the more your conclusions disagree with readers present beliefs the more effort youll have to expend on selling your ideas rather than having them. as you accelerate this drag increases till eventually you reach a point where 100 of your energy is devoted to overcoming it and you cant go any faster.its hard enough to overcome ones own misconceptions without having to think about how to get the resulting ideas past other peoples. i worry that if i wrote to persuade id start to shy away unconsciously from ideas i knew would be hard to sell. when i notice something surprising its usually very faint at first. theres nothing more than a slight stirring of discomfort. i dont want anything to get in the way of noticing it consciously.notes1 i had a strange feeling of being back in high school writing this. to get a good grade you had to both write the sort of pious crap you were expected to but also seem to be writing with conviction. the solution was a kind of method acting. it was revoltingly familiar to slip back into it.2 exercise for the reader rephrase that thought to please the same people the first version would offend.3 come to think of it there is one way in which i deliberately pander to readers because it doesnt change the number of words i switch person. this flattering distinction seems so natural to the average reader that they probably dont notice even when i switch in midsentence though you tend to notice when its done as conspicuously as this.

procrastination feeds on distractions. most people find it uncomfortable just to sit and do nothing you avoid work by doing something else.so one way to beat procrastination is to starve it of distractions. but thats not as straightforward as it sounds because there are people working hard to distract you. distraction is not a static obstacle that you avoid like you might avoid a rock in the road. distraction seeks you out.chesterfield described dirt as matter out of place. distracting is similarly desirable at the wrong time. and technology is continually being refined to produce more and more desirable things. which means that as we learn to avoid one class of distractions new ones constantly appear like drugresistant bacteria.television for example has after 50 years of refinement reached the point where its like visual crack. i realized when i was 13 that tv was addictive so i stopped watching it. but i read recently that the average american watches 4 hours of tv a day. a quarter of their life.tv is in decline now but only because people have found even more addictive ways of wasting time. and whats especially dangerous is that many happen at your computer. this is no accident. an ever larger percentage of office workers sit in front of computers connected to the internet and distractions always evolve toward the procrastinators.i remember when computers were for me at least exclusively for work. i might occasionally dial up a server to get mail or ftp files but most of the time i was offline. all i could do was write and program. now i feel as if someone snuck a television onto my desk. terribly addictive things are just a click away. run into an obstacle in what youre working on hmm i wonder whats new online. better check.after years of carefully avoiding classic time sinks like tv games and usenet i still managed to fall prey to distraction because i didnt realize that it evolves. something that used to be safe using the internet gradually became more and more dangerous. some days id wake up get a cup of tea and check the news then check email then check the news again then answer a few emails then suddenly notice it was almost lunchtime and i hadnt gotten any real work done. and this started to happen more and more often.it took me surprisingly long to realize how distracting the internet had become because the problem was intermittent. i ignored it the way you let yourself ignore a bug that only appears intermittently. when i was in the middle of a project distractions werent really a problem. it was when id finished one project and was deciding what to do next that they always bit me.another reason it was hard to notice the danger of this new type of distraction was that social customs hadnt yet caught up with it. if id spent a whole morning sitting on a sofa watching tv id have noticed very quickly. thats a known danger sign like drinking alone. but using the internet still looked and felt a lot like work.eventually though it became clear that the internet had become so much more distracting that i had to start treating it differently. basically i had to add a new application to my list of known time sinks firefox.  the problem is a hard one to solve because most people still need the internet for some things. if you drink too much you can solve that problem by stopping entirely. but you cant solve the problem of overeating by stopping eating. i couldnt simply avoid the internet entirely as id done with previous time sinks.at first i tried rules. for example id tell myself i was only going to use the internet twice a day. but these schemes never worked for long. eventually something would come up that required me to use it more than that. and then id gradually slip back into my old ways.addictive things have to be treated as if they were sentient adversariesas if there were a little man in your head always cooking up the most plausible arguments for doing whatever youre trying to stop doing. if you leave a path to it hell find it.the key seems to be visibility. the biggest ingredient in most bad habits is denial. so you have to make it so that you cant merely slip into doing the thing youre trying to avoid. it has to set off alarms.maybe in the long term the right answer for dealing with internet distractions will be software that watches and controls them. but in the meantime ive found a more drastic solution that definitely works to set up a separate computer for using the internet.i now leave wifi turned off on my main computer except when i need to transfer a file or edit a web page and i have a separate laptop on the other side of the room that i use to check mail or browse the web. irony of ironies its the computer steve huffman wrote reddit on. when steve and alexis auctioned off their old laptops for charity i bought them for the y combinator museum.my rule is that i can spend as much time online as i want as long as i do it on that computer. and this turns out to be enough. when i have to sit on the other side of the room to check email or browse the web i become much more aware of it. sufficiently aware in my case at least that its hard to spend more than about an hour a day online.and my main computer is now freed for work. if you try this trick youll probably be struck by how different it feels when your computer is disconnected from the internet. it was alarming to me how foreign it felt to sit in front of a computer that could only be used for work because that showed how much time i must have been wasting.wow. all i can do at this computer is work. ok i better work then.thats the good part. your old bad habits now help you to work. youre used to sitting in front of that computer for hours at a time. but you cant browse the web or check email now. what are you going to do you cant just sit there. so you start working.

i originally wrote this at the request of a company producing a report about entrepreneurship. unfortunately after reading it they decided it was too controversial to include.vc funding will probably dry up somewhat during the present recession like it usually does in bad times. but this time the result may be different. this time the number of new startups may not decrease. and that could be dangerous for vcs.when vc funding dried up after the internet bubble startups dried up too. there were not a lot of new startups being founded in 2003. but startups arent tied to vc the way they were 10 years ago. its now possible for vcs and startups to diverge. and if they do they may not reconverge once the economy gets better.the reason startups no longer depend so much on vcs is one that everyone in the startup business knows by now it has gotten much cheaper to start a startup. there are four main reasons moores law has made hardware cheap open source has made software free the web has made marketing and distribution free and more powerful programming languages mean development teams can be smaller. these changes have pushed the cost of starting a startup down into the noise. in a lot of startupsprobaby most startups funded by y combinatorthe biggest expense is simply the founders living expenses. weve had startups that were profitable on revenues of 3000 a month.3000 is insignificant as revenues go. why should anyone care about a startup making 3000 a month because although insignificant as revenue this amount of money can change a startups funding situation completely.someone running a startup is always calculating in the back of their mind how much runway they havehow long they have till the money in the bank runs out and they either have to be profitable raise more money or go out of business. once you cross the threshold of profitability however low your runway becomes infinite. its a qualitative change like the stars turning into lines and disappearing when the enterprise accelerates to warp speed. once youre profitable you dont need investors money. and because internet startups have become so cheap to run the threshold of profitability can be trivially low. which means many internet startups dont need vcscale investments anymore. for many startups vc funding has in the language of vcs gone from a musthave to a nicetohave.this change happened while no one was looking and its effects have been largely masked so far. it was during the trough after the internet bubble that it became trivially cheap to start a startup but few realized it because startups were so out of fashion. when startups came back into fashion around 2005 investors were starting to write checks again. and while founders may not have needed vc money the way they used to they were willing to take it if offeredpartly because there was a tradition of startups taking vc money and partly because startups like dogs tend to eat when given the opportunity. as long as vcs were writing checks founders were never forced to explore the limits of how little they needed them. there were a few startups who hit these limits accidentally because of their unusual circumstancesmost famously 37signals which hit the limit because they crossed into startup land from the other direction they started as a consulting firm so they had revenue before they had a product.vcs and founders are like two components that used to be bolted together. around 2000 the bolt was removed. because the components have so far been subjected to the same forces they still seem to be joined together but really one is just resting on the other. a sharp impact would make them fly apart. and the present recession could be that impact.because of y combinators position at the extreme end of the spectrum wed be the first to see signs of a separation between founders and investors and we are in fact seeing it. for example though the stock market crash does seem to have made investors more cautious it doesnt seem to have had any effect on the number of people who want to start startups. we take applications for funding every 6 months. applications for the current funding cycle closed on october 17 well after the markets tanked and even so we got a record number up 40 from the same cycle a year before.maybe things will be different a year from now if the economy continues to get worse but so far there is zero slackening of interest among potential founders. thats different from the way things felt in 2001. then there was a widespread feeling among potential founders that startups were over and that one should just go to grad school. that isnt happening this time and part of the reason is that even in a bad economy its not that hard to build something that makes 3000 a month. if investors stop writing checks who careswe also see signs of a divergence between founders and investors in the attitudes of existing startups weve funded. i was talking to one recently that had a round fall through at the last minute over the sort of trifle that breaks deals when investors feel they have the upper handover an uncertainty about whether the founders had correctly filed their 83b forms if you can believe that. and yet this startup is obviously going to succeed their traffic and revenue graphs look like a jet taking off. so i asked them if they wanted me to introduce them to more investors. to my surprise they said nothat theyd just spent four months dealing with investors and they were actually a lot happier now that they didnt have to. there was a friend they wanted to hire with the investor money and now theyd have to postpone that. but otherwise they felt they had enough in the bank to make it to profitability. to make sure they were moving to a cheaper apartment. and in this economy i bet they got a good deal on it.ive detected this investors arent worth the trouble vibe from several yc founders ive talked to recently. at least one startup from the most recent summer cycle may not even raise angel money let alone vc. ticketstumbler made it to profitability on y combinators 15000 investment and they hope not to need more. this surprised even us. although yc is based on the idea of it being cheap to start a startup we never anticipated that founders would grow successful startups on nothing more than yc funding.if founders decide vcs arent worth the trouble that could be bad for vcs. when the economy bounces back in a few years and theyre ready to write checks again they may find that founders have moved on.there is a founder community just as theres a vc community. they all know one another and techniques spread rapidly between them. if one tries a new programming language or a new hosting provider and gets good results 6 months later half of them are using it. and the same is true for funding. the current generation of founders want to raise money from vcs and sequoia specifically because larry and sergey took money from vcs and sequoia specifically. imagine what it would do to the vc business if the next hot company didnt take vc at all.vcs think theyre playing a zero sum game. in fact its not even that. if you lose a deal to benchmark you lose that deal but vc as an industry still wins. if you lose a deal to none all vcs lose.this recession may be different from the one after the internet bubble. this time founders may keep starting startups. and if they do vcs will have to keep writing checks or they could become irrelevant.

one of the most common types of advice we give at y combinator is to do things that dont scale. a lot of wouldbe founders believe that startups either take off or dont. you build something make it available and if youve made a better mousetrap people beat a path to your door as promised. or they dont in which case the market must not exist. 1actually startups take off because the founders make them take off. there may be a handful that just grew by themselves but usually it takes some sort of push to get them going. a good metaphor would be the cranks that car engines had before they got electric starters. once the engine was going it would keep going but there was a separate and laborious process to get it going.recruitthe most common unscalable thing founders have to do at the start is to recruit users manually. nearly all startups have to. you cant wait for users to come to you. you have to go out and get them.stripe is one of the most successful startups weve funded and the problem they solved was an urgent one. if anyone could have sat back and waited for users it was stripe. but in fact theyre famous within yc for aggressive early user acquisition.startups building things for other startups have a big pool of potential users in the other companies weve funded and none took better advantage of it than stripe. at yc we use the term collison installation for the technique they invented. more diffident founders ask will you try our beta and if the answer is yes they say great well send you a link. but the collison brothers werent going to wait. when anyone agreed to try stripe theyd say right then give me your laptop and set them up on the spot.there are two reasons founders resist going out and recruiting users individually. one is a combination of shyness and laziness. theyd rather sit at home writing code than go out and talk to a bunch of strangers and probably be rejected by most of them. but for a startup to succeed at least one founder usually the ceo will have to spend a lot of time on sales and marketing. 2the other reason founders ignore this path is that the absolute numbers seem so small at first. this cant be how the big famous startups got started they think. the mistake they make is to underestimate the power of compound growth. we encourage every startup to measure their progress by weekly growth rate. if you have 100 users you need to get 10 more next week to grow 10 a week. and while 110 may not seem much better than 100 if you keep growing at 10 a week youll be surprised how big the numbers get. after a year youll have 14000 users and after 2 years youll have 2 million.youll be doing different things when youre acquiring users a thousand at a time and growth has to slow down eventually. but if the market exists you can usually start by recruiting users manually and then gradually switch to less manual methods. 3airbnb is a classic example of this technique. marketplaces are so hard to get rolling that you should expect to take heroic measures at first. in airbnbs case these consisted of going door to door in new york recruiting new users and helping existing ones improve their listings. when i remember the airbnbs during yc i picture them with rolly bags because when they showed up for tuesday dinners theyd always just flown back from somewhere.fragileairbnb now seems like an unstoppable juggernaut but early on it was so fragile that about 30 days of going out and engaging in person with users made the difference between success and failure.that initial fragility was not a unique feature of airbnb. almost all startups are fragile initially. and thats one of the biggest things inexperienced founders and investors and reporters and knowitalls on forums get wrong about them. they unconsciously judge larval startups by the standards of established ones. theyre like someone looking at a newborn baby and concluding theres no way this tiny creature could ever accomplish anything.its harmless if reporters and knowitalls dismiss your startup. they always get things wrong. its even ok if investors dismiss your startup theyll change their minds when they see growth. the big danger is that youll dismiss your startup yourself. ive seen it happen. i often have to encourage founders who dont see the full potential of what theyre building. even bill gates made that mistake. he returned to harvard for the fall semester after starting microsoft. he didnt stay long but he wouldnt have returned at all if hed realized microsoft was going to be even a fraction of the size it turned out to be. 4the question to ask about an early stage startup is not is this company taking over the world but how big could this company get if the founders did the right things and the right things often seem both laborious and inconsequential at the time. microsoft cant have seemed very impressive when it was just a couple guys in albuquerque writing basic interpreters for a market of a few thousand hobbyists as they were then called but in retrospect that was the optimal path to dominating microcomputer software. and i know brian chesky and joe gebbia didnt feel like they were en route to the big time as they were taking professional photos of their first hosts apartments. they were just trying to survive. but in retrospect that too was the optimal path to dominating a big market.how do you find users to recruit manually if you build something to solve your own problems then you only have to find your peers which is usually straightforward. otherwise youll have to make a more deliberate effort to locate the most promising vein of users. the usual way to do that is to get some initial set of users by doing a comparatively untargeted launch and then to observe which kind seem most enthusiastic and seek out more like them. for example ben silbermann noticed that a lot of the earliest pinterest users were interested in design so he went to a conference of design bloggers to recruit users and that worked well. 5delightyou should take extraordinary measures not just to acquire users but also to make them happy. for as long as they could which turned out to be surprisingly long wufoo sent each new user a handwritten thank you note. your first users should feel that signing up with you was one of the best choices they ever made. and you in turn should be racking your brains to think of new ways to delight them.why do we have to teach startups this why is it counterintuitive for founders three reasons i think.one is that a lot of startup founders are trained as engineers and customer service is not part of the training of engineers. youre supposed to build things that are robust and elegant not be slavishly attentive to individual users like some kind of salesperson. ironically part of the reason engineering is traditionally averse to handholding is that its traditions date from a time when engineers were less powerful  when they were only in charge of their narrow domain of building things rather than running the whole show. you can be ornery when youre scotty but not when youre kirk.another reason founders dont focus enough on individual customers is that they worry it wont scale. but when founders of larval startups worry about this i point out that in their current state they have nothing to lose. maybe if they go out of their way to make existing users super happy theyll one day have too many to do so much for. that would be a great problem to have. see if you can make it happen. and incidentally when it does youll find that delighting customers scales better than you expected. partly because you can usually find ways to make anything scale more than you would have predicted and partly because delighting customers will by then have permeated your culture.i have never once seen a startup lured down a blind alley by trying too hard to make their initial users happy.but perhaps the biggest thing preventing founders from realizing how attentive they could be to their users is that theyve never experienced such attention themselves. their standards for customer service have been set by the companies theyve been customers of which are mostly big ones. tim cook doesnt send you a handwritten note after you buy a laptop. he cant. but you can. thats one advantage of being small you can provide a level of service no big company can. 6once you realize that existing conventions are not the upper bound on user experience its interesting in a very pleasant way to think about how far you could go to delight your users.experiencei was trying to think of a phrase to convey how extreme your attention to users should be and i realized steve jobs had already done it insanely great. steve wasnt just using insanely as a synonym for very. he meant it more literally  that one should focus on quality of execution to a degree that in everyday life would be considered pathological.all the most successful startups weve funded have and that probably doesnt surprise wouldbe founders. what novice founders dont get is what insanely great translates to in a larval startup. when steve jobs started using that phrase apple was already an established company. he meant the mac and its documentation and even packaging  such is the nature of obsession should be insanely well designed and manufactured. thats not hard for engineers to grasp. its just a more extreme version of designing a robust and elegant product.what founders have a hard time grasping and steve himself might have had a hard time grasping is what insanely great morphs into as you roll the time slider back to the first couple months of a startups life. its not the product that should be insanely great but the experience of being your user. the product is just one component of that. for a big company its necessarily the dominant one. but you can and should give users an insanely great experience with an early incomplete buggy product if you make up the difference with attentiveness.can perhaps but should yes. overengaging with early users is not just a permissible technique for getting growth rolling. for most successful startups its a necessary part of the feedback loop that makes the product good. making a better mousetrap is not an atomic operation. even if you start the way most successful startups have by building something you yourself need the first thing you build is never quite right. and except in domains with big penalties for making mistakes its often better not to aim for perfection initially. in software especially it usually works best to get something in front of users as soon as it has a quantum of utility and then see what they do with it. perfectionism is often an excuse for procrastination and in any case your initial model of users is always inaccurate even if youre one of them. 7the feedback you get from engaging directly with your earliest users will be the best you ever get. when youre so big you have to resort to focus groups youll wish you could go over to your users homes and offices and watch them use your stuff like you did when there were only a handful of them.firesometimes the right unscalable trick is to focus on a deliberately narrow market. its like keeping a fire contained at first to get it really hot before adding more logs.thats what facebook did. at first it was just for harvard students. in that form it only had a potential market of a few thousand people but because they felt it was really for them a critical mass of them signed up. after facebook stopped being for harvard students it remained for students at specific colleges for quite a while. when i interviewed mark zuckerberg at startup school he said that while it was a lot of work creating course lists for each school doing that made students feel the site was their natural home.any startup that could be described as a marketplace usually has to start in a subset of the market but this can work for other startups as well. its always worth asking if theres a subset of the market in which you can get a critical mass of users quickly. 8most startups that use the contained fire strategy do it unconsciously. they build something for themselves and their friends who happen to be the early adopters and only realize later that they could offer it to a broader market. the strategy works just as well if you do it unconsciously. the biggest danger of not being consciously aware of this pattern is for those who naively discard part of it. e.g. if you dont build something for yourself and your friends or even if you do but you come from the corporate world and your friends are not early adopters youll no longer have a perfect initial market handed to you on a platter.among companies the best early adopters are usually other startups. theyre more open to new things both by nature and because having just been started they havent made all their choices yet. plus when they succeed they grow fast and you with them. it was one of many unforeseen advantages of the yc model and specifically of making yc big that b2b startups now have an instant market of hundreds of other startups ready at hand.merakifor hardware startups theres a variant of doing things that dont scale that we call pulling a meraki. although we didnt fund meraki the founders were robert morriss grad students so we know their history. they got started by doing something that really doesnt scale assembling their routers themselves.hardware startups face an obstacle that software startups dont. the minimum order for a factory production run is usually several hundred thousand dollars. which can put you in a catch22 without a product you cant generate the growth you need to raise the money to manufacture your product. back when hardware startups had to rely on investors for money you had to be pretty convincing to overcome this. the arrival of crowdfunding or more precisely preorders has helped a lot. but even so id advise startups to pull a meraki initially if they can. thats what pebble did. the pebbles assembled the first several hundred watches themselves. if they hadnt gone through that phase they probably wouldnt have sold 10 million worth of watches when they did go on kickstarter.like paying excessive attention to early customers fabricating things yourself turns out to be valuable for hardware startups. you can tweak the design faster when youre the factory and you learn things youd never have known otherwise. eric migicovsky of pebble said one of the things he learned was how valuable it was to source good screws. who knewconsultsometimes we advise founders of b2b startups to take overengagement to an extreme and to pick a single user and act as if they were consultants building something just for that one user. the initial user serves as the form for your mold keep tweaking till you fit their needs perfectly and youll usually find youve made something other users want too. even if there arent many of them there are probably adjacent territories that have more. as long as you can find just one user who really needs something and can act on that need youve got a toehold in making something people want and thats as much as any startup needs initially. 9consulting is the canonical example of work that doesnt scale. but like other ways of bestowing ones favors liberally its safe to do it so long as youre not being paid to. thats where companies cross the line. so long as youre a product company thats merely being extra attentive to a customer theyre very grateful even if you dont solve all their problems. but when they start paying you specifically for that attentiveness  when they start paying you by the hour  they expect you to do everything.another consultinglike technique for recruiting initially lukewarm users is to use your software yourselves on their behalf. we did that at viaweb. when we approached merchants asking if they wanted to use our software to make online stores some said no but theyd let us make one for them. since we would do anything to get users we did. we felt pretty lame at the time. instead of organizing big strategic ecommerce partnerships we were trying to sell luggage and pens and mens shirts. but in retrospect it was exactly the right thing to do because it taught us how it would feel to merchants to use our software. sometimes the feedback loop was near instantaneous in the middle of building some merchants site id find i needed a feature we didnt have so id spend a couple hours implementing it and then resume building the site.manualtheres a more extreme variant where you dont just use your software but are your software. when you only have a small number of users you can sometimes get away with doing by hand things that you plan to automate later. this lets you launch faster and when you do finally automate yourself out of the loop youll know exactly what to build because youll have muscle memory from doing it yourself.when manual components look to the user like software this technique starts to have aspects of a practical joke. for example the way stripe delivered instant merchant accounts to its first users was that the founders manually signed them up for traditional merchant accounts behind the scenes.some startups could be entirely manual at first. if you can find someone with a problem that needs solving and you can solve it manually go ahead and do that for as long as you can and then gradually automate the bottlenecks. it would be a little frightening to be solving users problems in a way that wasnt yet automatic but less frightening than the far more common case of having something automatic that doesnt yet solve anyones problems.bigi should mention one sort of initial tactic that usually doesnt work the big launch. i occasionally meet founders who seem to believe startups are projectiles rather than powered aircraft and that theyll make it big if and only if theyre launched with sufficient initial velocity. they want to launch simultaneously in 8 different publications with embargoes. and on a tuesday of course since they read somewhere thats the optimum day to launch something.its easy to see how little launches matter. think of some successful startups. how many of their launches do you remember all you need from a launch is some initial core of users. how well youre doing a few months later will depend more on how happy you made those users than how many there were of them. 10so why do founders think launches matter a combination of solipsism and laziness. they think what theyre building is so great that everyone who hears about it will immediately sign up. plus it would be so much less work if you could get users merely by broadcasting your existence rather than recruiting them one at a time. but even if what youre building really is great getting users will always be a gradual process  partly because great things are usually also novel but mainly because users have other things to think about.partnerships too usually dont work. they dont work for startups in general but they especially dont work as a way to get growth started. its a common mistake among inexperienced founders to believe that a partnership with a big company will be their big break. six months later theyre all saying the same thing that was way more work than we expected and we ended up getting practically nothing out of it. 11its not enough just to do something extraordinary initially. you have to make an extraordinary effort initially. any strategy that omits the effort  whether its expecting a big launch to get you users or a big partner  is ipso facto suspect.vectorthe need to do something unscalably laborious to get started is so nearly universal that it might be a good idea to stop thinking of startup ideas as scalars. instead we should try thinking of them as pairs of what youre going to build plus the unscalable things youre going to do initially to get the company going.it could be interesting to start viewing startup ideas this way because now that there are two components you can try to be imaginative about the second as well as the first. but in most cases the second component will be what it usually is  recruit users manually and give them an overwhelmingly good experience  and the main benefit of treating startups as vectors will be to remind founders they need to work hard in two dimensions. 12in the best case both components of the vector contribute to your companys dna the unscalable things you have to do to get started are not merely a necessary evil but change the company permanently for the better. if you have to be aggressive about user acquisition when youre small youll probably still be aggressive when youre big. if you have to manufacture your own hardware or use your software on userss behalf youll learn things you couldnt have learned otherwise. and most importantly if you have to work hard to delight users when you only have a handful of them youll keep doing it when you have a lot.notes1 actually emerson never mentioned mousetraps specifically. he wrote if a man has good corn or wood or boards or pigs to sell or can make better chairs or knives crucibles or church organs than anybody else you will find a broad hardbeaten road to his house though it be in the woods.2 thanks to sam altman for suggesting i make this explicit. and no you cant avoid doing sales by hiring someone to do it for you. you have to do sales yourself initially. later you can hire a real salesperson to replace you.3 the reason this works is that as you get bigger your size helps you grow. patrick collison wrote at some point there was a very noticeable change in how stripe felt. it tipped from being this boulder we had to push to being a train car that in fact had its own momentum.4 one of the more subtle ways in which yc can help founders is by calibrating their ambitions because we know exactly how a lot of successful startups looked when they were just getting started.5 if youre building something for which you cant easily get a small set of users to observe  e.g. enterprise software  and in a domain where you have no connections youll have to rely on cold calls and introductions. but should you even be working on such an idea6 garry tan pointed out an interesting trap founders fall into in the beginning. they want so much to seem big that they imitate even the flaws of big companies like indifference to individual users. this seems to them more professional. actually its better to embrace the fact that youre small and use whatever advantages that brings.7 your user model almost couldnt be perfectly accurate because users needs often change in response to what you build for them. build them a microcomputer and suddenly they need to run spreadsheets on it because the arrival of your new microcomputer causes someone to invent the spreadsheet.8 if you have to choose between the subset that will sign up quickest and those that will pay the most its usually best to pick the former because those are probably the early adopters. theyll have a better influence on your product and they wont make you expend as much effort on sales. and though they have less money you dont need that much to maintain your target growth rate early on.9 yes i can imagine cases where you could end up making something that was really only useful for one user. but those are usually obvious even to inexperienced founders. so if its not obvious youd be making something for a market of one dont worry about that danger.10 there may even be an inverse correlation between launch magnitude and success. the only launches i remember are famous flops like the segway and google wave. wave is a particularly alarming example because i think it was actually a great idea that was killed partly by its overdone launch.11 google grew big on the back of yahoo but that wasnt a partnership. yahoo was their customer.12 it will also remind founders that an idea where the second component is empty  an idea where there is nothing you can do to get going e.g. because you have no way to find users to recruit manually  is probably a bad idea at least for those founders.

one of the biggest things holding people back from doing great work is the fear of making something lame. and this fear is not an irrational one. many great projects go through a stage early on where they dont seem very impressive even to their creators. you have to push through this stage to reach the great work that lies beyond. but many people dont. most people dont even reach the stage of making something theyre embarrassed by let alone continue past it. theyre too frightened even to start.imagine if we could turn off the fear of making something lame. imagine how much more wed do.is there any hope of turning it off i think so. i think the habits at work here are not very deeply rooted.making new things is itself a new thing for us as a species. it has always happened but till the last few centuries it happened so slowly as to be invisible to individual humans. and since we didnt need customs for dealing with new ideas we didnt develop any.we just dont have enough experience with early versions of ambitious projects to know how to respond to them. we judge them as we would judge more finished work or less ambitious projects. we dont realize theyre a special case.or at least most of us dont. one reason im confident we can do better is that its already starting to happen. there are already a few places that are living in the future in this respect. silicon valley is one of them an unknown person working on a strangesounding idea wont automatically be dismissed the way they would back home. in silicon valley people have learned how dangerous that is.the right way to deal with new ideas is to treat them as a challenge to your imagination  not just to have lower standards but to switch polarity entirely from listing the reasons an idea wont work to trying to think of ways it could. thats what i do when i meet people with new ideas. ive become quite good at it but ive had a lot of practice. being a partner at y combinator means being practically immersed in strangesounding ideas proposed by unknown people. every six months you get thousands of new ones thrown at you and have to sort through them knowing that in a world with a powerlaw distribution of outcomes it will be painfully obvious if you miss the needle in this haystack. optimism becomes urgent.but im hopeful that with time this kind of optimism can become widespread enough that it becomes a social custom not just a trick used by a few specialists. it is after all an extremely lucrative trick and those tend to spread quickly.of course inexperience is not the only reason people are too harsh on early versions of ambitious projects. they also do it to seem clever. and in a field where the new ideas are risky like startups those who dismiss them are in fact more likely to be right. just not when their predictions are weighted by outcome.but there is another more sinister reason people dismiss new ideas. if you try something ambitious many of those around you will hope consciously or unconsciously that youll fail. they worry that if you try something ambitious and succeed it will put you above them. in some countries this is not just an individual failing but part of the national culture.i wouldnt claim that people in silicon valley overcome these impulses because theyre morally better. 1 the reason many hope youll succeed is that they hope to rise with you. for investors this incentive is particularly explicit. they want you to succeed because they hope youll make them rich in the process. but many other people you meet can hope to benefit in some way from your success. at the very least theyll be able to say when youre famous that theyve known you since way back.but even if silicon valleys encouraging attitude is rooted in selfinterest it has over time actually grown into a sort of benevolence. encouraging startups has been practiced for so long that it has become a custom. now it just seems that thats what one does with startups.maybe silicon valley is too optimistic. maybe its too easily fooled by impostors. many less optimistic journalists want to believe that. but the lists of impostors they cite are suspiciously short and plagued with asterisks. 2 if you use revenue as the test silicon valleys optimism seems better tuned than the rest of the worlds. and because it works it will spread.theres a lot more to new ideas than new startup ideas of course. the fear of making something lame holds people back in every field. but silicon valley shows how quickly customs can evolve to support new ideas. and that in turn proves that dismissing new ideas is not so deeply rooted in human nature that it cant be unlearnt.unfortunately if you want to do new things youll face a force more powerful than other peoples skepticism your own skepticism. you too will judge your early work too harshly. how do you avoid thatthis is a difficult problem because you dont want to completely eliminate your horror of making something lame. thats what steers you toward doing good work. you just want to turn it off temporarily the way a painkiller temporarily turns off pain.people have already discovered several techniques that work. hardy mentions two in a mathematicians apologygood work is not done by humble men. it is one of the first duties of a professor for example in any subject to exaggerate a little both the importance of his subject and his importance in it.if you overestimate the importance of what youre working on that will compensate for your mistakenly harsh judgment of your initial results. if you look at something thats 20 of the way to a goal worth 100 and conclude that its 10 of the way to a goal worth 200 your estimate of its expected value is correct even though both components are wrong.it also helps as hardy suggests to be slightly overconfident. ive noticed in many fields that the most successful people are slightly overconfident. on the face of it this seems implausible. surely it would be optimal to have exactly the right estimate of ones abilities. how could it be an advantage to be mistaken because this error compensates for other sources of error in the opposite direction being slightly overconfident armors you against both other peoples skepticism and your own.ignorance has a similar effect. its safe to make the mistake of judging early work as finished work if youre a sufficiently lax judge of finished work. i doubt its possible to cultivate this kind of ignorance but empirically its a real advantage especially for the young.another way to get through the lame phase of ambitious projects is to surround yourself with the right people  to create an eddy in the social headwind. but its not enough to collect people who are always encouraging. youd learn to discount that. you need colleagues who can actually tell an ugly duckling from a baby swan. the people best able to do this are those working on similar projects of their own which is why university departments and research labs work so well. you dont need institutions to collect colleagues. they naturally coalesce given the chance. but its very much worth accelerating this process by seeking out other people trying to do new things.teachers are in effect a special case of colleagues. its a teachers job both to see the promise of early work and to encourage you to continue. but teachers who are good at this are unfortunately quite rare so if you have the opportunity to learn from one take it. 3for some it might work to rely on sheer discipline to tell yourself that you just have to press on through the initial crap phase and not get discouraged. but like a lot of just tell yourself advice this is harder than it sounds. and it gets still harder as you get older because your standards rise. the old do have one compensating advantage though theyve been through this before.it can help if you focus less on where you are and more on the rate of change. you wont worry so much about doing bad work if you can see it improving. obviously the faster it improves the easier this is. so when you start something new its good if you can spend a lot of time on it. thats another advantage of being young you tend to have bigger blocks of time.another common trick is to start by considering new work to be of a different less exacting type. to start a painting saying that its just a sketch or a new piece of software saying that its just a quick hack. then you judge your initial results by a lower standard. once the project is rolling you can sneakily convert it to something more. 4this will be easier if you use a medium that lets you work fast and doesnt require too much commitment up front. its easier to convince yourself that something is just a sketch when youre drawing in a notebook than when youre carving stone. plus you get initial results faster. 5 6it will be easier to try out a risky project if you think of it as a way to learn and not just as a way to make something. then even if the project truly is a failure youll still have gained by it. if the problem is sharply enough defined failure itself is knowledge if the theorem youre trying to prove turns out to be false or you use a structural member of a certain size and it fails under stress youve learned something even if it isnt what you wanted to learn. 7one motivation that works particularly well for me is curiosity. i like to try new things just to see how theyll turn out. we started y combinator in this spirit and it was one of main things that kept me going while i was working on bel. having worked for so long with various dialects of lisp i was very curious to see what its inherent shape was what youd end up with if you followed the axiomatic approach all the way.but its a bit strange that you have to play mind games with yourself to avoid being discouraged by lamelooking early efforts. the thing youre trying to trick yourself into believing is in fact the truth. a lamelooking early version of an ambitious project truly is more valuable than it seems. so the ultimate solution may be to teach yourself that.one way to do it is to study the histories of people whove done great work. what were they thinking early on what was the very first thing they did it can sometimes be hard to get an accurate answer to this question because people are often embarrassed by their earliest work and make little effort to publish it. they too misjudge it. but when you can get an accurate picture of the first steps someone made on the path to some great work theyre often pretty feeble. 8perhaps if you study enough such cases you can teach yourself to be a better judge of early work. then youll be immune both to other peoples skepticism and your own fear of making something lame. youll see early work for what it is.curiously enough the solution to the problem of judging early work too harshly is to realize that our attitudes toward it are themselves early work. holding everything to the same standard is a crude version 1. were already evolving better customs and we can already see signs of how big the payoff will be.notes1 this assumption may be too conservative. there is some evidence that historically the bay area has attracted a different sort of person than say new york city.2 one of their great favorites is theranos. but the most conspicuous feature of theranoss cap table is the absence of silicon valley firms. journalists were fooled by theranos but silicon valley investors werent.3 i made two mistakes about teachers when i was younger. i cared more about professors research than their reputations as teachers and i was also wrong about what it meant to be a good teacher. i thought it simply meant to be good at explaining things.4 patrick collison points out that you can go past treating something as a hack in the sense of a prototype and onward to the sense of the word that means something closer to a practical jokei think there may be something related to being a hack that can be powerful  the idea of making the tenuousness and implausibility a feature. yes its a bit ridiculous right im just trying to see how far such a naive approach can get. yc seemed to me to have this characteristic.5 much of the advantage of switching from physical to digital media is not the software per se but that it lets you start something new with little upfront commitment.6 john carmack addsthe value of a medium without a vast gulf between the early work and the final work is exemplified in game mods. the original quake game was a golden age for mods because everything was very flexible but so crude due to technical limitations that quick hacks to try out a gameplay idea werent all that far from the official game. many careers were born from that but as the commercial game quality improved over the years it became almost a full time job to make a successful mod that would be appreciated by the community. this was dramatically reversed with minecraft and later roblox where the entire esthetic of the experience was so explicitly crude that innovative gameplay concepts became the overriding value. these crude game mods by single authors are now often bigger deals than massive professional teams work.7 lisa randall suggests that wetreat new things as experiments. that way theres no such thing as failing since you learn something no matter what. you treat it like an experiment in the sense that if it really rules something out you give up and move on but if theres some way to vary it to make it work better go ahead and do that8 michael nielsen points out that the internet has made this easier because you can see programmers first commits musicians first videos and so on.

jessica and i have certain words that have special significance when were talking about startups. the highest compliment we can pay to founders is to describe them as earnest. this is not by itself a guarantee of success. you could be earnest but incapable. but when founders are both formidable another of our words and earnest theyre as close to unstoppable as you get.earnestness sounds like a boring even victorian virtue. it seems a bit of an anachronism that people in silicon valley would care about it. why does this matter so muchwhen you call someone earnest youre making a statement about their motives. it means both that theyre doing something for the right reasons and that theyre trying as hard as they can. if we imagine motives as vectors it means both the direction and the magnitude are right. though these are of course related when people are doing something for the right reasons they try harder. 1the reason motives matter so much in silicon valley is that so many people there have the wrong ones. starting a successful startup makes you rich and famous. so a lot of the people trying to start them are doing it for those reasons. instead of what instead of interest in the problem for its own sake. that is the root of earnestness. 2its also the hallmark of a nerd. indeed when people describe themselves as x nerds what they mean is that theyre interested in x for its own sake and not because its cool to be interested in x or because of what they can get from it. theyre saying they care so much about x that theyre willing to sacrifice seeming cool for its sake.a genuine interest in something is a very powerful motivator  for some people the most powerful motivator of all. 3 which is why its what jessica and i look for in founders. but as well as being a source of strength its also a source of vulnerability. caring constrains you. the earnest cant easily reply in kind to mocking banter or put on a cool facade of nihil admirari. they care too much. they are doomed to be the straight man. thats a real disadvantage in your teenage years when mocking banter and nihil admirari often have the upper hand. but it becomes an advantage later.its a commonplace now that the kids who were nerds in high school become the cool kids bosses later on. but people misunderstand why this happens. its not just because the nerds are smarter but also because theyre more earnest. when the problems get harder than the fake ones youre given in high school caring about them starts to matter.does it always matter do the earnest always win not always. it probably doesnt matter much in politics or in crime or in certain types of business that are similar to crime like gambling personal injury law patent trolling and so on. nor does it matter in academic fields at the more bogus end of the spectrum. and though i dont know enough to say for sure it may not matter in some kinds of humor it may be possible to be completely cynical and still be very funny. 4looking at the list of fields i mentioned theres an obvious pattern. except possibly for humor these are all types of work id avoid like the plague. so that could be a useful heuristic for deciding which fields to work in how much does earnestness matter which can in turn presumably be inferred from the prevalence of nerds at the top.along with nerd another word that tends to be associated with earnestness is naive. the earnest often seem naive. its not just that they dont have the motives other people have. they often dont fully grasp that such motives exist. or they may know intellectually that they do but because they dont feel them they forget about them. 5it works to be slightly naive not just about motives but also believe it or not about the problems youre working on. naive optimism can compensate for the bit rot that rapid change causes in established beliefs. you plunge into some problem saying how hard can it be and then after solving it you learn that it was till recently insoluble.naivete is an obstacle for anyone who wants to seem sophisticated and this is one reason wouldbe intellectuals find it so difficult to understand silicon valley. it hasnt been safe for such people to use the word earnest outside scare quotes since oscar wilde wrote the importance of being earnest in 1895. and yet when you zoom in on silicon valley right into jessica livingstons brain thats what her xray vision is seeking out in founders. earnestness whod have guessed reporters literally cant believe it when founders making piles of money say that they started their companies to make the world better. the situation seems made for mockery. how can these founders be so naive as not to realize how implausible they soundthough those asking this question dont realize it thats not a rhetorical question.a lot of founders are faking it of course particularly the smaller fry and the soon to be smaller fry. but not all of them. there are a significant number of founders who really are interested in the problem theyre solving mainly for its own sake.why shouldnt there be we have no difficulty believing that people would be interested in history or math or even old bus tickets for their own sake. why cant there be people interested in selfdriving cars or social networks for their own sake when you look at the question from this side it seems obvious there would be. and isnt it likely that having a deep interest in something would be a source of great energy and resilience it is in every other field.the question really is why we have a blind spot about business. and the answer to that is obvious if you know enough history. for most of history making large amounts of money has not been very intellectually interesting. in preindustrial times it was never far from robbery and some areas of business still retain that character except using lawyers instead of soldiers.but there are other areas of business where the work is genuinely interesting. henry ford got to spend much of his time working on interesting technical problems and for the last several decades the trend in that direction has been accelerating. its much easier now to make a lot of money by working on something youre interested in than it was 50 years ago. and that rather than how fast they grow may be the most important change that startups represent. though indeed the fact that the work is genuinely interesting is a big part of why it gets done so fast. 6can you imagine a more important change than one in the relationship between intellectual curiosity and money these are two of the most powerful forces in the world and in my lifetime theyve become significantly more aligned. how could you not be fascinated to watch something like this happening in real timei meant this essay to be about earnestness generally and now ive gone and talked about startups again. but i suppose at least it serves as an example of an x nerd in the wild.notes1 its interesting how many different ways there are not to be earnest to be cleverly cynical to be superficially brilliant to be conspicuously virtuous to be cool to be sophisticated to be orthodox to be a snob to bully to pander to be on the make. this pattern suggests that earnestness is not one end of a continuum but a target one can fall short of in multiple dimensions.another thing i notice about this list is that it sounds like a list of the ways people behave on twitter. whatever else social media is its a vivid catalogue of ways not to be earnest.2 peoples motives are as mixed in silicon valley as anywhere else. even the founders motivated mostly by money tend to be at least somewhat interested in the problem theyre solving and even the founders most interested in the problem theyre solving also like the idea of getting rich. but theres great variation in the relative proportions of different founders motivations.and when i talk about wrong motives i dont mean morally wrong. theres nothing morally wrong with starting a startup to make money. i just mean that those startups dont do as well.3 the most powerful motivator for most people is probably family. but there are some for whom intellectual curiosity comes first. in his wonderful autobiography paul halmos says explicitly that for a mathematician math must come before anything else including family. which at least implies that it did for him.4 interestingly just as the word nerd implies earnestness even when used as a metaphor the word politics implies the opposite. its not only in actual politics that earnestness seems to be a handicap but also in office politics and academic politics.5 its a bigger social error to seem naive in most european countries than it is in america and this may be one of subtler reasons startups are less common there. founder culture is completely at odds with sophisticated cynicism.the most earnest part of europe is scandinavia and not surprisingly this is also the region with the highest number of successful startups per capita.6 much of business is schleps and probably always will be. but even being a professor is largely schleps. it would be interesting to collect statistics about the schlep ratios of different jobs but i suspect theyd rarely be less than 30.

if the world were static we could have monotonically increasing confidence in our beliefs. the more and more varied experience a belief survived the less likely it would be false. most people implicitly believe something like this about their opinions. and theyre justified in doing so with opinions about things that dont change much like human nature. but you cant trust your opinions in the same way about things that change which could include practically everything else.when experts are wrong its often because theyre experts on an earlier version of the world.is it possible to avoid that can you protect yourself against obsolete beliefs to some extent yes. i spent almost a decade investing in early stage startups and curiously enough protecting yourself against obsolete beliefs is exactly what you have to do to succeed as a startup investor. most really good startup ideas look like bad ideas at first and many of those look bad specifically because some change in the world just switched them from bad to good. i spent a lot of time learning to recognize such ideas and the techniques i used may be applicable to ideas in general.the first step is to have an explicit belief in change. people who fall victim to a monotonically increasing confidence in their opinions are implicitly concluding the world is static. if you consciously remind yourself it isnt you start to look for change.where should one look for it beyond the moderately useful generalization that human nature doesnt change much the unfortunate fact is that change is hard to predict. this is largely a tautology but worth remembering all the same change that matters usually comes from an unforeseen quarter.so i dont even try to predict it. when i get asked in interviews to predict the future i always have to struggle to come up with something plausiblesounding on the fly like a student who hasnt prepared for an exam. 1 but its not out of laziness that i havent prepared. it seems to me that beliefs about the future are so rarely correct that they usually arent worth the extra rigidity they impose and that the best strategy is simply to be aggressively openminded. instead of trying to point yourself in the right direction admit you have no idea what the right direction is and try instead to be super sensitive to the winds of change.its ok to have working hypotheses even though they may constrain you a bit because they also motivate you. its exciting to chase things and exciting to try to guess answers. but you have to be disciplined about not letting your hypotheses harden into anything more. 2i believe this passive m.o. works not just for evaluating new ideas but also for having them. the way to come up with new ideas is not to try explicitly to but to try to solve problems and simply not discount weird hunches you have in the process.the winds of change originate in the unconscious minds of domain experts. if youre sufficiently expert in a field any weird idea or apparently irrelevant question that occurs to you is ipso facto worth exploring. 3 within y combinator when an idea is described as crazy its a complimentin fact on average probably a higher compliment than when an idea is described as good.startup investors have extraordinary incentives for correcting obsolete beliefs. if they can realize before other investors that some apparently unpromising startup isnt they can make a huge amount of money. but the incentives are more than just financial. investors opinions are explicitly tested startups come to them and they have to say yes or no and then fairly quickly they learn whether they guessed right. the investors who say no to a google and there were several will remember it for the rest of their lives.anyone who must in some sense bet on ideas rather than merely commenting on them has similar incentives. which means anyone who wants such incentives can have them by turning their comments into bets if you write about a topic in some fairly durable and public form youll find you worry much more about getting things right than most people would in a casual conversation. 4another trick ive found to protect myself against obsolete beliefs is to focus initially on people rather than ideas. though the nature of future discoveries is hard to predict ive found i can predict quite well what sort of people will make them. good new ideas come from earnest energetic independentminded people.betting on people over ideas saved me countless times as an investor. we thought airbnb was a bad idea for example. but we could tell the founders were earnest energetic and independentminded. indeed almost pathologically so. so we suspended disbelief and funded them.this too seems a technique that should be generally applicable. surround yourself with the sort of people new ideas come from. if you want to notice quickly when your beliefs become obsolete you cant do better than to be friends with the people whose discoveries will make them so.its hard enough already not to become the prisoner of your own expertise but it will only get harder because change is accelerating. thats not a recent trend change has been accelerating since the paleolithic era. ideas beget ideas. i dont expect that to change. but i could be wrong.notes1 my usual trick is to talk about aspects of the present that most people havent noticed yet.2 especially if they become well enough known that people start to identify them with you. you have to be extra skeptical about things you want to believe and once a hypothesis starts to be identified with you it will almost certainly start to be in that category.3 in practice sufficiently expert doesnt require one to be recognized as an expertwhich is a trailing indicator in any case. in many fields a year of focused work plus caring a lot would be enough.4 though they are public and persist indefinitely comments on e.g. forums and places like twitter seem empirically to work like casual conversation. the threshold may be whether what you write has a title.

i originally intended this for startup founders who are often surprised by the attention they get as their companies grow but it applies equally to anyone who becomes famous.if you become sufficiently famous youll acquire some fans who like you too much. these people are sometimes called fanboys and though i dislike that term im going to have to use it here. we need some word for them because this is a distinct phenomenon from someone simply liking your work.a fanboy is obsessive and uncritical. liking you becomes part of their identity and they create an image of you in their own head that is much better than reality. everything you do is good because you do it. if you do something bad they find a way to see it as good. and their love for you is not usually a quiet private one. they want everyone to know how great you are.well you may be thinking i could do without this kind of obsessive fan but i know there are all kinds of people in the world and if this is the worst consequence of fame thats not so bad.unfortunately this is not the worst consequence of fame. as well as fanboys youll have haters.a hater is obsessive and uncritical. disliking you becomes part of their identity and they create an image of you in their own head that is much worse than reality. everything you do is bad because you do it. if you do something good they find a way to see it as bad. and their dislike for you is not usually a quiet private one. they want everyone to know how awful you are.if youre thinking of checking ill save you the trouble. the second and fifth paragraphs are identical except for good being switched to bad and so on.i spent years puzzling about haters. what are they and where do they come from then one day it dawned on me. haters are just fanboys with the sign switched.note that by haters i dont simply mean trolls. im not talking about people who say bad things about you and then move on. im talking about the much smaller group of people for whom this becomes a kind of obsession and who do it repeatedly over a long period.like fans haters seem to be an automatic consequence of fame. anyone sufficiently famous will have them. and like fans haters are energized by the fame of whoever they hate. they hear a song by some pop singer. they dont like it much. if the singer were an obscure one theyd just forget about it. but instead they keep hearing her name and this seems to drive some people crazy. everyones always going on about this singer but shes no good shes a fraudthat word fraud is an important one. its the spectral signature of a hater to regard the object of their hatred as a fraud. they cant deny their fame. indeed their fame is if anything exaggerated in the haters mind. they notice every mention of the singers name because every mention makes them angrier. in their own minds they exaggerate both the singers fame and her lack of talent and the only way to reconcile those two ideas is to conclude that she has tricked everyone.what sort of people become haters can anyone become one im not sure about this but ive noticed some patterns. haters are generally losers in a very specific sense although they are occasionally talented they have never achieved much. and indeed anyone successful enough to have achieved significant fame would be unlikely to regard another famous person as a fraud on that account because anyone famous knows how random fame is.but haters are not always complete losers. they are not always the proverbial guy living in his moms basement. many are but some have some amount of talent. in fact i suspect that a sense of frustrated talent is what drives some people to become haters. theyre not just saying its unfair that soandso is famous but its unfair that soandso is famous and not me.could a hater be cured if they achieved something impressive my guess is thats a moot point because they never will. ive been able to observe for long enough that im fairly confident the pattern works both ways not only do people who do great work never become haters haters never do great work. although i dislike the word fanboy its evocative of something important about both haters and fanboys. it implies that the fanboy is so slavishly predictable in his admiration that hes diminished as a result that hes less than a man.haters seem even more diminished. i can imagine being a fanboy. i can think of people whose work i admire so much that i could abase myself before them out of sheer gratitude. if p. g. wodehouse were still alive i could see myself being a wodehouse fanboy. but i could not imagine being a hater.knowing that haters are just fanboys with the sign bit flipped makes it much easier to deal with them. we dont need a separate theory of haters. we can just use existing techniques for dealing with obsessive fans.the most important of which is simply not to think much about them. if youre like most people who become famous enough to acquire haters your initial reaction will be one of mystification. why does this guy seem to have it in for me where does his obsessive energy come from and what makes him so appallingly nasty what did i do to set him off is it something i can fixthe mistake here is to think of the hater as someone you have a dispute with. when you have a dispute with someone its usually a good idea to try to understand why theyre upset and then fix things if you can. disputes are distracting. but its a false analogy to think of a hater as someone you have a dispute with. its an understandable mistake if youve never encountered haters before. but when you realize that youre dealing with a hater and what a hater is its clear that its a waste of time even to think about them. if you have obsessive fans do you spend any time wondering what makes them love you so much no you just think some people are kind of crazy and thats the end of it.since haters are equivalent to fanboys thats the way to deal with them too. there may have been something that set them off. but its not something that would have set off a normal person so theres no reason to spend any time thinking about it. its not you its them.notes1 there are of course some people who are genuine frauds. how can you distinguish between x calling y a fraud because x is a hater and because y is a fraud look at neutral opinion. actual frauds are usually pretty conspicuous. thoughtful people are rarely taken in by them. so if there are some thoughtful people who like y you can usually assume y is not a fraud.2 i would make an exception for teenagers who sometimes act in such extreme ways that they are literally not themselves. i can imagine a teenage kid being a hater and then growing out of it. but not anyone over 25.3 i have a much worse memory for misdeeds than my wife jessica who is a connoisseur of character but i dont wish it were better. most disputes are a waste of time even if youre in the right and its easy to bury the hatchet with someone if you cant remember why you were mad at them.4 a competent hater will not merely attack you individually but will try to get mobs after you. in some cases you may want to refute whatever bogus claim they made in order to do so. but err on the side of not because ultimately it probably wont matter.

at a yc event last week brian chesky gave a talk that everyone who was there will remember. most founders i talked to afterward said it was the best theyd ever heard. ron conway for the first time in his life forgot to take notes. im not going to try to reproduce it here. instead i want to talk about a question it raised.the theme of brians talk was that the conventional wisdom about how to run larger companies is mistaken. as airbnb grew wellmeaning people advised him that he had to run the company in a certain way for it to scale. their advice could be optimistically summarized as hire good people and give them room to do their jobs. he followed this advice and the results were disastrous. so he had to figure out a better way on his own which he did partly by studying how steve jobs ran apple. so far it seems to be working. airbnbs free cash flow margin is now among the best in silicon valley.the audience at this event included a lot of the most successful founders weve funded and one after another said that the same thing had happened to them. theyd been given the same advice about how to run their companies as they grew but instead of helping their companies it had damaged them.why was everyone telling these founders the wrong thing that was the big mystery to me. and after mulling it over for a bit i figured out the answer what they were being told was how to run a company you hadnt founded  how to run a company if youre merely a professional manager. but this m.o. is so much less effective that to founders it feels broken. there are things founders can do that managers cant and not doing them feels wrong to founders because it is.in effect there are two different ways to run a company founder mode and manager mode. till now most people even in silicon valley have implicitly assumed that scaling a startup meant switching to manager mode. but we can infer the existence of another mode from the dismay of founders whove tried it and the success of their attempts to escape from it.there are as far as i know no books specifically about founder mode. business schools dont know it exists. all we have so far are the experiments of individual founders whove been figuring it out for themselves. but now that we know what were looking for we can search for it. i hope in a few years founder mode will be as well understood as manager mode. we can already guess at some of the ways it will differ.the way managers are taught to run companies seems to be like modular design in the sense that you treat subtrees of the org chart as black boxes. you tell your direct reports what to do and its up to them to figure out how. but you dont get involved in the details of what they do. that would be micromanaging them which is bad.hire good people and give them room to do their jobs. sounds great when its described that way doesnt it except in practice judging from the report of founder after founder what this often turns out to mean is hire professional fakers and let them drive the company into the ground.one theme i noticed both in brians talk and when talking to founders afterward was the idea of being gaslit. founders feel like theyre being gaslit from both sides  by the people telling them they have to run their companies like managers and by the people working for them when they do. usually when everyone around you disagrees with you your default assumption should be that youre mistaken. but this is one of the rare exceptions. vcs who havent been founders themselves dont know how founders should run companies and clevel execs as a class include some of the most skillful liars in the world. 1whatever founder mode consists of its pretty clear that its going to break the principle that the ceo should engage with the company only via his or her direct reports. skiplevel meetings will become the norm instead of a practice so unusual that theres a name for it. and once you abandon that constraint there are a huge number of permutations to choose from.for example steve jobs used to run an annual retreat for what he considered the 100 most important people at apple and these were not the 100 people highest on the org chart. can you imagine the force of will it would take to do this at the average company and yet imagine how useful such a thing could be. it could make a big company feel like a startup. steve presumably wouldnt have kept having these retreats if they didnt work. but ive never heard of another company doing this. so is it a good idea or a bad one we still dont know. thats how little we know about founder mode. 2obviously founders cant keep running a 2000 person company the way they ran it when it had 20. theres going to have to be some amount of delegation. where the borders of autonomy end up and how sharp they are will probably vary from company to company. theyll even vary from time to time within the same company as managers earn trust. so founder mode will be more complicated than manager mode. but it will also work better. we already know that from the examples of individual founders groping their way toward it.indeed another prediction ill make about founder mode is that once we figure out what it is well find that a number of individual founders were already most of the way there  except that in doing what they did they were regarded by many as eccentric or worse. 3curiously enough its an encouraging thought that we still know so little about founder mode. look at what founders have achieved already and yet theyve achieved this against a headwind of bad advice. imagine what theyll do once we can tell them how to run their companies like steve jobs instead of john sculley.

i wrote this for forbes who asked me to write something about the qualities we look for in founders. in print they had to cut the last item because they didnt have room.1. determinationthis has turned out to be the most important quality in startup founders. we thought when we started y combinator that the most important quality would be intelligence. thats the myth in the valley. and certainly you dont want founders to be stupid. but as long as youre over a certain threshold of intelligence what matters most is determination. youre going to hit a lot of obstacles. you cant be the sort of person who gets demoralized easily.bill clerico and rich aberman of wepay are a good example. theyre doing a finance startup which means endless negotiations with big bureaucratic companies. when youre starting a startup that depends on deals with big companies to exist it often feels like theyre trying to ignore you out of existence. but when bill clerico starts calling you you may as well do what he asks because he is not going away.2. flexibilityyou do not however want the sort of determination implied by phrases like dont give up on your dreams. the world of startups is so unpredictable that you need to be able to modify your dreams on the fly. the best metaphor ive found for the combination of determination and flexibility you need is a running back. hes determined to get downfield but at any given moment he may need to go sideways or even backwards to get there.the current record holder for flexibility may be daniel gross of greplin. he applied to yc with some bad ecommerce idea. we told him wed fund him if he did something else. he thought for a second and said ok. he then went through two more ideas before settling on greplin. hed only been working on it for a couple days when he presented to investors at demo day but he got a lot of interest. he always seems to land on his feet.3. imaginationintelligence does matter a lot of course. it seems like the type that matters most is imagination. its not so important to be able to solve predefined problems quickly as to be able to come up with surprising new ideas. in the startup world most good ideas seem bad initially. if they were obviously good someone would already be doing them. so you need the kind of intelligence that produces ideas with just the right level of craziness.airbnb is that kind of idea. in fact when we funded airbnb we thought it was too crazy. we couldnt believe large numbers of people would want to stay in other peoples places. we funded them because we liked the founders so much. as soon as we heard theyd been supporting themselves by selling obama and mccain branded breakfast cereal they were in. and it turned out the idea was on the right side of crazy after all.4. naughtinessthough the most successful founders are usually good people they tend to have a piratical gleam in their eye. theyre not goody twoshoes type good. morally they care about getting the big questions right but not about observing proprieties. thats why id use the word naughty rather than evil. they delight in breaking rules but not rules that matter. this quality may be redundant though it may be implied by imagination.sam altman of loopt is one of the most successful alumni so we asked him what question we could put on the y combinator application that would help us discover more people like him. he said to ask about a time when theyd hacked something to their advantagehacked in the sense of beating the system not breaking into computers. it has become one of the questions we pay most attention to when judging applications.5. friendshipempirically it seems to be hard to start a startup with just one founder. most of the big successes have two or three. and the relationship between the founders has to be strong. they must genuinely like one another and work well together. startups do to the relationship between the founders what a dog does to a sock if it can be pulled apart it will be.emmett shear and justin kan of justin.tv are a good example of close friends who work well together. theyve known each other since second grade. they can practically read one anothers minds. im sure they argue like all founders but i have never once sensed any unresolved tension between them.

i usually avoid politics but since we now seem to have an administration thats open to suggestions im going to risk making one. the single biggest thing the government could do to increase the number of startups in this country is a policy that would cost nothing establish a new class of visa for startup founders.the biggest constraint on the number of new startups that get created in the us is not tax policy or employment law or even sarbanesoxley. its that we wont let the people who want to start them into the country.letting just 10000 startup founders into the country each year could have a visible effect on the economy. if we assume 4 people per startup which is probably an overestimate thats 2500 new companies. each year. they wouldnt all grow as big as google but out of 2500 some would come close.by definition these 10000 founders wouldnt be taking jobs from americans it could be part of the terms of the visa that they couldnt work for existing companies only new ones theyd founded. in fact theyd cause there to be more jobs for americans because the companies they started would hire more employees as they grew.the tricky part might seem to be how one defined a startup. but that could be solved quite easily let the market decide. startup investors work hard to find the best startups. the government could not do better than to piggyback on their expertise and use investment by recognized startup investors as the test of whether a company was a real startup.how would the government decide whos a startup investor the same way they decide what counts as a university for student visas. well establish our own accreditation procedure. we know who one another are.10000 people is a drop in the bucket by immigration standards but would represent a huge increase in the pool of startup founders. i think this would have such a visible effect on the economy that it would make the legislator who introduced the bill famous. the only way to know for sure would be to try it and that would cost practically nothing.

ive seen the same pattern in many different fields even though lots of people have worked hard in the field only a small fraction of the space of possibilities has been explored because theyve all worked on similar things.even the smartest most imaginative people are surprisingly conservative when deciding what to work on. people who would never dream of being fashionable in any other way get sucked into working on fashionable problems.if you want to try working on unfashionable problems one of the best places to look is in fields that people think have already been fully explored essays lisp venture funding  you may notice a pattern here. if you can find a new approach into a big but apparently played out field the value of whatever you discover will be multiplied by its enormous surface area.the best protection against getting drawn into working on the same things as everyone else may be to genuinely love what youre doing. then youll continue to work on it even if you make the same mistake as other people and think that its too marginal to matter.

most startups that raise money do it more than once. a typical trajectory might be 1 to get started with a few tens of thousands from something like y combinator or individual angels then 2 raise a few hundred thousand to a few million to build the company and then 3 once the company is clearly succeeding raise one or more later rounds to accelerate growth.reality can be messier. some companies raise money twice in phase 2. others skip phase 1 and go straight to phase 2. and at y combinator we get an increasing number of companies that have already raised amounts in the hundreds of thousands. but the three phase path is at least the one about which individual startups paths oscillate.this essay focuses on phase 2 fundraising. thats the type the startups we fund are doing on demo day and this essay is the advice we give them.forcesfundraising is hard in both senses hard like lifting a heavy weight and hard like solving a puzzle. its hard like lifting a weight because its intrinsically hard to convince people to part with large sums of money. that problem is irreducible it should be hard. but much of the other kind of difficulty can be eliminated. fundraising only seems a puzzle because its an alien world to most founders and i hope to fix that by supplying a map through it.to founders the behavior of investors is often opaque  partly because their motivations are obscure but partly because they deliberately mislead you. and the misleading ways of investors combine horribly with the wishful thinking of inexperienced founders. at yc were always warning founders about this danger and investors are probably more circumspect with yc startups than with other companies they talk to and even so we witness a constant series of explosions as these two volatile components combine. 1if youre an inexperienced founder the only way to survive is by imposing external constraints on yourself. you cant trust your intuitions. im going to give you a set of rules here that will get you through this process if anything will. at certain moments youll be tempted to ignore them. so rule number zero is these rules exist for a reason. you wouldnt need a rule to keep you going in one direction if there werent powerful forces pushing you in another.the ultimate source of the forces acting on you are the forces acting on investors. investors are pinched between two kinds of fear fear of investing in startups that fizzle and fear of missing out on startups that take off. the cause of all this fear is the very thing that makes startups such attractive investments the successful ones grow very fast. but that fast growth means investors cant wait around. if you wait till a startup is obviously a success its too late. to get the really high returns you have to invest in startups when its still unclear how theyll do. but that in turn makes investors nervous theyre about to invest in a flop. as indeed they often are.what investors would like to do if they could is wait. when a startup is only a few months old every week that passes gives you significantly more information about them. but if you wait too long other investors might take the deal away from you. and of course the other investors are all subject to the same forces. so what tends to happen is that they all wait as long as they can then when some act the rest have to.dont raise money unless you want it and it wants you.such a high proportion of successful startups raise money that it might seem fundraising is one of the defining qualities of a startup. actually it isnt. rapid growth is what makes a company a startup. most companies in a position to grow rapidly find that a taking outside money helps them grow faster and b their growth potential makes it easy to attract such money. its so common for both a and b to be true of a successful startup that practically all do raise outside money. but there may be cases where a startup either wouldnt want to grow faster or outside money wouldnt help them to and if youre one of them dont raise money.the other time not to raise money is when you wont be able to. if you try to raise money before you can convince investors youll not only waste your time but also burn your reputation with those investors.be in fundraising mode or not.one of the things that surprises founders most about fundraising is how distracting it is. when you start fundraising everything else grinds to a halt. the problem is not the time fundraising consumes but that it becomes the top idea in your mind. a startup cant endure that level of distraction for long. an early stage startup grows mostly because the founders make it grow and if the founders look away growth usually drops sharply.because fundraising is so distracting a startup should either be in fundraising mode or not. and when you do decide to raise money you should focus your whole attention on it so you can get it done quickly and get back to work. 2you can take money from investors when youre not in fundraising mode. you just cant expend any attention on it. there are two things that take attention convincing investors and negotiating with them. so when youre not in fundraising mode you should take money from investors only if they require no convincing and are willing to invest on terms youll take without negotiation. for example if a reputable investor is willing to invest on a convertible note using standard paperwork that is either uncapped or capped at a good valuation you can take that without having to think. 3 the terms will be whatever they turn out to be in your next equity round. and no convincing means just that zero time spent meeting with investors or preparing materials for them. if an investor says theyre ready to invest but they need you to come in for one meeting to meet some of the partners tell them no if youre not in fundraising mode because thats fundraising. 4 tell them politely tell them youre focusing on the company right now and that youll get back to them when youre fundraising but do not get sucked down the slippery slope.investors will try to lure you into fundraising when youre not. its great for them if they can because they can thereby get a shot at you before everyone else. theyll send you emails saying they want to meet to learn more about you. if you get coldemailed by an associate at a vc firm you shouldnt meet even if you are in fundraising mode. deals dont happen that way. 5 but even if you get an email from a partner you should try to delay meeting till youre in fundraising mode. they may say they just want to meet and chat but investors never just want to meet and chat. what if they like you what if they start to talk about giving you money will you be able to resist having that conversation unless youre experienced enough at fundraising to have a casual conversation with investors that stays casual its safer to tell them that youd be happy to later when youre fundraising but that right now you need to focus on the company. 6companies that are successful at raising money in phase 2 sometimes tack on a few investors after leaving fundraising mode. this is fine if fundraising went well youll be able to do it without spending time convincing them or negotiating about terms.get introductions to investors.before you can talk to investors you have to be introduced to them. if youre presenting at a demo day youll be introduced to a whole bunch simultaneously. but even if you are you should supplement these with intros you collect yourself.do you have to be introduced in phase 2 yes. some investors will let you email them a business plan but you can tell from the way their sites are organized that they dont really want startups to approach them directly.intros vary greatly in effectiveness. the best type of intro is from a wellknown investor who has just invested in you. so when you get an investor to commit ask them to introduce you to other investors they respect. 7 the next best type of intro is from a founder of a company theyve funded. you can also get intros from other people in the startup community like lawyers and reporters.there are now sites like angellist fundersclub and wefunder that can introduce you to investors. we recommend startups treat them as auxiliary sources of money. raise money first from leads you get yourself. those will on average be better investors. plus youll have an easier time raising money on these sites once you can say youve already raised some from wellknown investors.hear no till you hear yes.treat investors as saying no till they unequivocally say yes in the form of a definite offer with no contingencies.i mentioned earlier that investors prefer to wait if they can. whats particularly dangerous for founders is the way they wait. essentially they lead you on. they seem like theyre about to invest right up till the moment they say no. if they even say no. some of the worse ones never actually do say no they just stop replying to your emails. they hope that way to get a free option on investing. if they decide later that they want to invest  usually because theyve heard youre a hot deal  they can pretend they just got distracted and then restart the conversation as if theyd been about to. 8thats not the worst thing investors will do. some will use language that makes it sound as if theyre committing but which doesnt actually commit them. and wishful thinking founders are happy to meet them half way. 9fortunately the next rule is a tactic for neutralizing this behavior. but to work it depends on you not being tricked by the no that sounds like yes. its so common for founders to be misledmistaken about this that we designed a protocol to fix the problem. if you believe an investor has committed get them to confirm it. if you and they have different views of reality whether the source of the discrepancy is their sketchiness or your wishful thinking the prospect of confirming a commitment in writing will flush it out. and till they confirm regard them as saying no.do breadthfirst search weighted by expected value.when you talk to investors your m.o. should be breadthfirst search weighted by expected value. you should always talk to investors in parallel rather than serially. you cant afford the time it takes to talk to investors serially plus if you only talk to one investor at a time they dont have the pressure of other investors to make them act. but you shouldnt pay the same attention to every investor because some are more promising prospects than others. the optimal solution is to talk to all potential investors in parallel but give higher priority to the more promising ones. 10expected value  how likely an investor is to say yes multiplied by how good it would be if they did. so for example an eminent investor who would invest a lot but will be hard to convince might have the same expected value as an obscure angel who wont invest much but will be easy to convince. whereas an obscure angel who will only invest a small amount and yet needs to meet multiple times before making up his mind has very low expected value. meet such investors last if at all. 11doing breadthfirst search weighted by expected value will save you from investors who never explicitly say no but merely drift away because youll drift away from them at the same rate. it protects you from investors who flake in much the same way that a distributed algorithm protects you from processors that fail. if some investor isnt returning your emails or wants to have lots of meetings but isnt progressing toward making you an offer you automatically focus less on them. but you have to be disciplined about assigning probabilities. you cant let how much you want an investor influence your estimate of how much they want you.know where you stand.how do you judge how well youre doing with an investor when investors habitually seem more positive than they are by looking at their actions rather than their words. every investor has some track they need to move along from the first conversation to wiring the money and you should always know what that track consists of where you are on it and how fast youre moving forward.never leave a meeting with an investor without asking what happens next. what more do they need in order to decide do they need another meeting with you to talk about what and how soon do they need to do something internally like talk to their partners or investigate some issue how long do they expect it to take dont be too pushy but know where you stand. if investors are vague or resist answering such questions assume the worst investors who are seriously interested in you will usually be happy to talk about what has to happen between now and wiring the money because theyre already running through that in their heads. 12if youre experienced at negotiations you already know how to ask such questions. 13 if youre not theres a trick you can use in this situation. investors know youre inexperienced at raising money. inexperience there doesnt make you unattractive. being a noob at technology would if youre starting a technology startup but not being a noob at fundraising. larry and sergey were noobs at fundraising. so you can just confess that youre inexperienced at this and ask how their process works and where you are in it. 14get the first commitment.the biggest factor in most investors opinions of you is the opinion of other investors. once you start getting investors to commit it becomes increasingly easy to get more to. but the other side of this coin is that its often hard to get the first commitment.getting the first substantial offer can be half the total difficulty of fundraising. what counts as a substantial offer depends on who its from and how much it is. money from friends and family doesnt usually count no matter how much. but if you get 50k from a well known vc firm or angel investor that will usually be enough to set things rolling. 15close committed money.its not a deal till the moneys in the bank. i often hear inexperienced founders say things like weve raised 800000 only to discover that zero of it is in the bank so far. remember the twin fears that torment investors the fear of missing out that makes them jump early and the fear of jumping onto a turd that results this is a market where people are exceptionally prone to buyers remorse. and its also one that furnishes them plenty of excuses to gratify it. the public markets snap startup investing around like a whip. if the chinese economy blows up tomorrow all bets are off. but there are lots of surprises for individual startups too and they tend to be concentrated around fundraising. tomorrow a big competitor could appear or you could get cded or your cofounder could quit. 16even a days delay can bring news that causes an investor to change their mind. so when someone commits get the money. knowing where you stand doesnt end when they say theyll invest. after they say yes know what the timetable is for getting the money and then babysit that process till it happens. institutional investors have people in charge of wiring money but you may have to hunt angels down in person to collect a check.inexperienced investors are the ones most likely to get buyers remorse. established ones have learned to treat saying yes as like diving off a diving board and they also have more brand to preserve. but ive heard of cases of even toptier vc firms welching on deals.avoid investors who dont lead.since getting the first offer is most of the difficulty of fundraising that should be part of your calculation of expected value when you start. you have to estimate not just the probability that an investor will say yes but the probability that theyd be the first to say yes and the latter is not simply a constant fraction of the former. some investors are known for deciding quickly and those are extra valuable early on.conversely an investor who will only invest once other investors have is worthless initially. and while most investors are influenced by how interested other investors are in you there are some who have an explicit policy of only investing after other investors have. you can recognize this contemptible subspecies of investor because they often talk about leads. they say that they dont lead or that theyll invest once you have a lead. sometimes they even claim to be willing to lead themselves by which they mean they wont invest till you get x from other investors. its great if by lead they mean theyll invest unilaterally and in addition will help you raise more. whats lame is when they use the term to mean they wont invest unless you can raise more elsewhere. 17where does this term lead come from up till a few years ago startups raising money in phase 2 would usually raise equity rounds in which several investors invested at the same time using the same paperwork. youd negotiate the terms with one lead investor and then all the others would sign the same documents and all the money change hands at the closing.series a rounds still work that way but things now work differently for most fundraising prior to the series a. now there are rarely actual rounds before the a round or leads for them. now startups simply raise money from investors one at a time till they feel they have enough.since there are no longer leads why do investors use that term because its a more legitimatesounding way of saying what they really mean. all they really mean is that their interest in you is a function of other investors interest in you. i.e. the spectral signature of all mediocre investors. but when phrased in terms of leads it sounds like there is something structural and therefore legitimate about their behavior.when an investor tells you i want to invest in you but i dont lead translate that in your mind to no except yes if you turn out to be a hot deal. and since thats the default opinion of any investor about any startup theyve essentially just told you nothing.when you first start fundraising the expected value of an investor who wont lead is zero so talk to such investors last if at all.have multiple plans.many investors will ask how much youre planning to raise. this question makes founders feel they should be planning to raise a specific amount. but in fact you shouldnt. its a mistake to have fixed plans in an undertaking as unpredictable as fundraising.so why do investors ask how much you plan to raise for much the same reasons a salesperson in a store will ask how much were you planning to spend if you walk in looking for a gift for a friend. you probably didnt have a precise amount in mind you just want to find something good and if its inexpensive so much the better. the salesperson asks you this not because youre supposed to have a plan to spend a specific amount but so they can show you only things that cost the most youll pay.similarly when investors ask how much you plan to raise its not because youre supposed to have a plan. its to see whether youd be a suitable recipient for the size of investment they like to make and also to judge your ambition reasonableness and how far you are along with fundraising.if youre a wizard at fundraising you can say we plan to raise a 7 million series a round and well be accepting termsheets next tuesday. ive known a handful of founders who could pull that off without having vcs laugh in their faces. but if youre in the inexperienced but earnest majority the solution is analogous to the solution i recommend for pitching your startup do the right thing and then just tell investors what youre doing.and the right strategy in fundraising is to have multiple plans depending on how much you can raise. ideally you should be able to tell investors something like we can make it to profitability without raising any more money but if we raise a few hundred thousand we can hire one or two smart friends and if we raise a couple million we can hire a whole engineering team etc.different plans match different investors. if youre talking to a vc firm that only does series a rounds though there are few of those left it would be a waste of time talking about any but your most expensive plan. whereas if youre talking to an angel who invests 20k at a time and you havent raised any money yet you probably want to focus on your least expensive plan.if youre so fortunate as to have to think about the upper limit on what you should raise a good rule of thumb is to multiply the number of people you want to hire times 15k times 18 months. in most startups nearly all the costs are a function of the number of people and 15k per month is the conventional total cost including benefits and even office space per person. 15k per month is high so dont actually spend that much. but its ok to use a high estimate when fundraising to add a margin for error. if you have additional expenses like manufacturing add in those at the end. assuming you have none and you think you might hire 20 people the most youd want to raise is 20 x 15k x 18  5.4 million. 18underestimate how much you want.though you can focus on different plans when talking to different types of investors you should on the whole err on the side of underestimating the amount you hope to raise.for example if youd like to raise 500k its better to say initially that youre trying to raise 250k. then when you reach 150k youre more than half done. that sends two useful signals to investors that youre doing well and that they have to decide quickly because youre running out of room. whereas if youd said you were raising 500k youd be less than a third done at 150k. if fundraising stalled there for an appreciable time youd start to read as a failure.saying initially that youre raising 250k doesnt limit you to raising that much. when you reach your initial target and you still have investor interest you can just decide to raise more. startups do that all the time. in fact most startups that are very successful at fundraising end up raising more than they originally intended.im not saying you should lie but that you should lower your expectations initially. there is almost no downside in starting with a low number. it not only wont cap the amount you raise but will on the whole tend to increase it.a good metaphor here is angle of attack. if you try to fly at too steep an angle of attack you just stall. if you say right out of the gate that you want to raise a 5 million series a round unless youre in a very strong position you not only wont get that but wont get anything. better to start at a low angle of attack build up speed and then gradually increase the angle if you want.be profitable if you can.you will be in a much stronger position if your collection of plans includes one for raising zero dollars  i.e. if you can make it to profitability without raising any additional money. ideally you want to be able to say to investors well succeed no matter what but raising money will help us do it faster.there are many analogies between fundraising and dating and this is one of the strongest. no one wants you if you seem desperate. and the best way not to seem desperate is not to be desperate. thats one reason we urge startups during yc to keep expenses low and to try to make it to ramen profitability before demo day. though it sounds slightly paradoxical if you want to raise money the best thing you can do is get yourself to the point where you dont need to.there are almost two distinct modes of fundraising one in which founders who need money knock on doors seeking it knowing that otherwise the company will die or at the very least people will have to be fired and one in which founders who dont need money take some to grow faster than they could merely on their own revenues. to emphasize the distinction im going to name them type a fundraising is when you dont need money and type b fundraising is when you do.inexperienced founders read about famous startups doing what was type a fundraising and decide they should raise money too since that seems to be how startups work. except when they raise money they dont have a clear path to profitability and are thus doing type b fundraising. and they are then surprised how difficult and unpleasant it is.of course not all startups can make it to ramen profitability in a few months. and some that dont still manage to have the upper hand over investors if they have some other advantage like extraordinary growth numbers or exceptionally formidable founders. but as time passes it gets increasingly difficult to fundraise from a position of strength without being profitable. 19dont optimize for valuation.when you raise money what should your valuation be the most important thing to understand about valuation is that its not that important.founders who raise money at high valuations tend to be unduly proud of it. founders are often competitive people and since valuation is usually the only visible number attached to a startup they end up competing to raise money at the highest valuation. this is stupid because fundraising is not the test that matters. the real test is revenue. fundraising is just a means to that end. being proud of how well you did at fundraising is like being proud of your college grades.not only is fundraising not the test that matters valuation is not even the thing to optimize about fundraising. the number one thing you want from phase 2 fundraising is to get the money you need so you can get back to focusing on the real test the success of your company. number two is good investors. valuation is at best third.the empirical evidence shows just how unimportant it is. dropbox and airbnb are the most successful companies weve funded so far and they raised money after y combinator at premoney valuations of 4 million and 2.6 million respectively. prices are so much higher now that if you can raise money at all youll probably raise it at higher valuations than dropbox and airbnb. so let that satisfy your competitiveness. youre doing better than dropbox and airbnb at a test that doesnt matter.when you start fundraising your initial valuation or valuation cap will be set by the deal you make with the first investor who commits. you can increase the price for later investors if you get a lot of interest but by default the valuation you got from the first investor becomes your asking price.so if youre raising money from multiple investors as most companies do in phase 2 you have to be careful to avoid raising the first from an overeager investor at a price you wont be able to sustain. you can of course lower your price if you need to in which case you should give the same terms to investors who invested earlier at a higher price but you may lose a bunch of leads in the process of realizing you need to do this.what you can do if you have eager first investors is raise money from them on an uncapped convertible note with an mfn clause. this is essentially a way of saying that the valuation cap of the note will be determined by the next investors you raise money from.it will be easier to raise money at a lower valuation. it shouldnt be but it is. since phase 2 prices vary at most 10x and the big successes generate returns of at least 100x investors should pick startups entirely based on their estimate of the probability that the company will be a big success and hardly at all on price. but although its a mistake for investors to care about price a significant number do. a startup that investors seem to like but wont invest in at a cap of x will have an easier time at x2. 20yesno before valuation.some investors want to know what your valuation is before they even talk to you about investing. if your valuation has already been set by a prior investment at a specific valuation or cap you can tell them that number. but if it isnt set because you havent closed anyone yet and they try to push you to name a price resist doing so. if this would be the first investor youve closed then this could be the tipping point of fundraising. that means closing this investor is the first priority and you need to get the conversation onto that instead of being dragged sideways into a discussion of price.fortunately there is a way to avoid naming a price in this situation. and it is not just a negotiating trick its how you both should be operating. tell them that valuation is not the most important thing to you and that you havent thought much about it that you are looking for investors you want to partner with and who want to partner with you and that you should talk first about whether they want to invest at all. then if they decide they do want to invest you can figure out a price. but first things first.since valuation isnt that important and getting fundraising rolling is we usually tell founders to give the first investor who commits as low a price as they need to. this is a safe technique so long as you combine it with the next one. 21beware valuation sensitive investors.occasionally youll encounter investors who describe themselves as valuation sensitive. what this means in practice is that they are compulsive negotiators who will suck up a lot of your time trying to push your price down. you should therefore never approach such investors first. while you shouldnt chase high valuations you also dont want your valuation to be set artificially low because the first investor who committed happened to be a compulsive negotiator. some such investors have value but the time to approach them is near the end of fundraising when youre in a position to say this is the price everyone else has paid take it or leave it and not mind if they leave it. this way youll not only get market price but it will also take less time.ideally you know which investors have a reputation for being valuation sensitive and can postpone dealing with them till last but occasionally one you didnt know about will pop up early on. the rule of doing breadth first search weighted by expected value already tells you what to do in this case slow down your interactions with them.there are a handful of investors who will try to invest at a lower valuation even when your price has already been set. lowering your price is a backup plan you resort to when you discover youve let the price get set too high to close all the money you need. so youd only want to talk to this sort of investor if you were about to do that anyway. but since investor meetings have to be arranged at least a few days in advance and you cant predict when youll need to resort to lowering your price this means in practice that you should approach this type of investor last if at all.if youre surprised by a lowball offer treat it as a backup offer and delay responding to it. when someone makes an offer in good faith you have a moral obligation to respond in a reasonable time. but lowballing you is a dick move that should be met with the corresponding countermove.accept offers greedily.im a little leery of using the term greedily when writing about fundraising lest nonprogrammers misunderstand me but a greedy algorithm is simply one that doesnt try to look into the future. a greedy algorithm takes the best of the options in front of it right now. and that is how startups should approach fundraising in phases 2 and later. dont try to look into the future because a the future is unpredictable and indeed in this business youre often being deliberately misled about it and b your first priority in fundraising should be to get it finished and get back to work anyway.if someone makes you an acceptable offer take it. if you have multiple incompatible offers take the best. dont reject an acceptable offer in the hope of getting a better one in the future.these simple rules cover a wide variety of cases. if youre raising money from many investors roll them up as they say yes. as you start to feel youve raised enough the threshold for acceptable will start to get higher.in practice offers exist for stretches of time not points. so when you get an acceptable offer that would be incompatible with others e.g. an offer to invest most of the money you need you can tell the other investors youre talking to that you have an offer good enough to accept and give them a few days to make their own. this could lose you some that might have made an offer if they had more time. but by definition you dont care the initial offer was acceptable.some investors will try to prevent others from having time to decide by giving you an exploding offer meaning one thats only valid for a few days. offers from the very best investors explode less frequently and less rapidly  fred wilson never gives exploding offers for example  because theyre confident youll pick them. but lowertier investors sometimes give offers with very short fuses because they believe no one who had other options would choose them. a deadline of three working days is acceptable. you shouldnt need more than that if youve been talking to investors in parallel. but a deadline any shorter is a sign youre dealing with a sketchy investor. you can usually call their bluff and you may need to. 22it might seem that instead of accepting offers greedily your goal should be to get the best investors as partners. that is certainly a good goal but in phase 2 get the best investors only rarely conflicts with accept offers greedily because the best investors dont usually take any longer to decide than the others. the only case where the two strategies give conflicting advice is when you have to forgo an offer from an acceptable investor to see if youll get an offer from a better one. if you talk to investors in parallel and push back on exploding offers with excessively short deadlines that will almost never happen. but if it does get the best investors is in the average case bad advice. the best investors are also the most selective because they get their pick of all the startups. they reject nearly everyone they talk to which means in the average case its a bad trade to exchange a definite offer from an acceptable investor for a potential offer from a better one.the situation is different in phase 1. you cant apply to all the incubators in parallel because some offset their schedules to prevent this. in phase 1 accept offers greedily and get the best investors do conflict so if you want to apply to multiple incubators you should do it in such a way that the ones you want most decide first.sometimes when youre raising money from multiple investors a series a will emerge out of those conversations and these rules even cover what to do in that case. when an investor starts to talk to you about a series a keep taking smaller investments till they actually give you a termsheet. theres no practical difficulty. if the smaller investments are on convertible notes theyll just convert into the series a round. the series a investor wont like having all these other random investors as bedfellows but if it bothers them so much they should get on with giving you a termsheet. till they do you dont know for sure they will and the greedy algorithm tells you what to do. 23dont sell more than 25 in phase 2.if you do well you will probably raise a series a round eventually. i say probably because things are changing with series a rounds. startups may start to skip them. but only one company weve funded has so far so tentatively assume the path to huge passes through an a round. 24which means you should avoid doing things in earlier rounds that will mess up raising an a round. for example if youve sold more than about 40 of your company total it starts to get harder to raise an a round because vcs worry there will not be enough stock left to keep the founders motivated.our rule of thumb is not to sell more than 25 in phase 2 on top of whatever you sold in phase 1 which should be less than 15. if youre raising money on uncapped notes youll have to guess what the eventual equity round valuation might be. guess conservatively.since the goal of this rule is to avoid messing up the series a theres obviously an exception if you end up raising a series a in phase 2 as a handful of startups do.have one person handle fundraising.if you have multiple founders pick one to handle fundraising so the others can keep working on the company. and since the danger of fundraising is not the time taken up by the actual meetings but that it becomes the top idea in your mind the founder who handles fundraising should make a conscious effort to insulate the other founders from the details of the process. 25if the founders mistrust one another this could cause some friction. but if the founders mistrust one another you have worse problems to worry about than how to organize fundraising.the founder who handles fundraising should be the ceo who should in turn be the most formidable of the founders. even if the ceo is a programmer and another founder is a salesperson yes. if you happen to be that type of founding team youre effectively a single founder when it comes to fundraising.its ok to bring all the founders to meet an investor who will invest a lot and who needs this meeting as the final step before deciding. but wait till that point. introducing an investor to your cofounders should be like introducing a girlboyfriend to your parents  something you do only when things reach a certain stage of seriousness.even if there are still one or more founders focusing on the company during fundraising growth will slow. but try to get as much growth as you can because fundraising is a segment of time not a point and what happens to the company during that time affects the outcome. if your numbers grow significantly between two investor meetings investors will be hot to close and if your numbers are flat or down theyll start to get cold feet.youll need an executive summary and maybe a deck.traditionally phase 2 fundraising consists of presenting a slide deck in person to investors. sequoia describes what such a deck should contain and since theyre the customer you can take their word for it.i say traditionally because im ambivalent about decks and though perhaps this is wishful thinking they seem to be on the way out. a lot of the most successful startups we fund never make decks in phase 2. they just talk to investors and explain what they plan to do. fundraising usually takes off fast for the startups that are most successful at it and theyre thus able to excuse themselves by saying that they havent had time to make a deck.youll also want an executive summary which should be no more than a page long and describe in the most matter of fact language what you plan to do why its a good idea and what progress youve made so far. the point of the summary is to remind the investor who may have met many startups that day what you talked about.assume that if you give someone a copy of your deck or executive summary it will be passed on to whoever youd least like to have it. but dont refuse on that account to give copies to investors you meet. you just have to treat such leaks as a cost of doing business. in practice its not that high a cost. though founders are rightly indignant when their plans get leaked to competitors i cant think of a startup whose outcome has been affected by it.sometimes an investor will ask you to send them your deck andor executive summary before they decide whether to meet with you. i wouldnt do that. its a sign theyre not really interested.stop fundraising when it stops working.when do you stop fundraising ideally when youve raised enough. but what if you havent raised as much as youd like when do you give upits hard to give general advice about this because there have been cases of startups that kept trying to raise money even when it seemed hopeless and miraculously succeeded. but what i usually tell founders is to stop fundraising when you start to get a lot of air in the straw. when youre drinking through a straw you can tell when you get to the end of the liquid because you start to get a lot of air in the straw. when your fundraising options run out they usually run out in the same way. dont keep sucking on the straw if youre just getting air. its not going to get better.dont get addicted to fundraising.fundraising is a chore for most founders but some find it more interesting than working on their startup. the work at an early stage startup often consists of unglamorous schleps. whereas fundraising when its going well can be quite the opposite. instead of sitting in your grubby apartment listening to users complain about bugs in your software youre being offered millions of dollars by famous investors over lunch at a nice restaurant. 26the danger of fundraising is particularly acute for people who are good at it. its always fun to work on something youre good at. if youre one of these people beware. fundraising is not what will make your company successful. listening to users complain about bugs in your software is what will make you successful. and the big danger of getting addicted to fundraising is not merely that youll spend too long on it or raise too much money. its that youll start to think of yourself as being already successful and lose your taste for the schleps you need to undertake to actually be successful. startups can be destroyed by this.when i see a startup with young founders that is fabulously successful at fundraising i mentally decrease my estimate of the probability that theyll succeed. the press may be writing about them as if theyd been anointed as the next google but im thinking this is going to end badly.dont raise too much.though only a handful of startups have to worry about this it is possible to raise too much. the dangers of raising too much are subtle but insidious. one is that it will set impossibly high expectations. if you raise an excessive amount of money it will be at a high valuation and the danger of raising money at too high a valuation is that you wont be able to increase it sufficiently the next time you raise money.a companys valuation is expected to rise each time it raises money. if not its a sign of a company in trouble which makes you unattractive to investors. so if you raise money in phase 2 at a postmoney valuation of 30 million the premoney valuation of your next round if you want to raise one is going to have to be at least 50 million. and you have to be doing really really well to raise money at 50 million.its very dangerous to let the competitiveness of your current round set the performance threshold you have to meet to raise your next one because the two are only loosely coupled.but the money itself may be more dangerous than the valuation. the more you raise the more you spend and spending a lot of money can be disastrous for an early stage startup. spending a lot makes it harder to become profitable and perhaps even worse it makes you more rigid because the main way to spend money is people and the more people you have the harder it is to change directions. so if you do raise a huge amount of money dont spend it. you will find that advice almost impossible to follow so hot will be the money burning a hole in your pocket but i feel obliged at least to try.be nice.startups raising money occasionally alienate investors by seeming arrogant. sometimes because they are arrogant and sometimes because theyre noobs clumsily attempting to mimic the toughness theyve observed in experienced founders.its a mistake to behave arrogantly to investors. while there are certain situations in which certain investors like certain kinds of arrogance investors vary greatly in this respect and a flick of the whip that will bring one to heel will make another roar with indignation. the only safe strategy is never to seem arrogant at all.that will require some diplomacy if you follow the advice ive given here because the advice ive given is essentially how to play hardball back. when you refuse to meet an investor because youre not in fundraising mode or slow down your interactions with an investor who moves too slow or treat a contingent offer as the no it actually is and then by accepting offers greedily end up leaving that investor out youre going to be doing things investors dont like. so you must cushion the blow with soft words. at yc we tell startups they can blame us. and now that ive written this everyone else can blame me if they want. that plus the inexperience card should work in most situations sorry we think youre great but pg said startups shouldnt  and since were new to fundraising we feel like we have to play it safe.the danger of behaving arrogantly is greatest when youre doing well. when everyone wants you its hard not to let it go to your head. especially if till recently no one wanted you. but restrain yourself. the startup world is a small place and startups have lots of ups and downs. this is a domain where its more true than usual that pride goeth before a fall. 27be nice when investors reject you as well. the best investors are not wedded to their initial opinion of you. if they reject you in phase 2 and you end up doing well theyll often invest in phase 3. in fact investors who reject you are some of your warmest leads for future fundraising. any investor who spent significant time deciding probably came close to saying yes. often you have some internal champion who only needs a little more evidence to convince the skeptics. so its wise not merely to be nice to investors who reject you but unless they behaved badly to treat it as the beginning of a relationship.the bar will be higher next time.assume the money you raise in phase 2 will be the last you ever raise. you must make it to profitability on this money if you can.over the past several years the investment community has evolved from a strategy of anointing a small number of winners early and then supporting them for years to a strategy of spraying money at early stage startups and then ruthlessly culling them at the next stage. this is probably the optimal strategy for investors. its too hard to pick winners early on. better to let the market do it for you. but it often comes as a surprise to startups how much harder it is to raise money in phase 3.when your company is only a couple months old all it has to be is a promising experiment thats worth funding to see how it turns out. the next time you raise money the experiment has to have worked. you have to be on a trajectory that leads to going public. and while there are some ideas where the proof that the experiment worked might consist of e.g. query response times usually the proof is profitability. usually phase 3 fundraising has to be type a fundraising.in practice there are two ways startups hose themselves between phases 2 and 3. some are just too slow to become profitable. they raise enough money to last for two years. there doesnt seem any particular urgency to be profitable. so they dont make any effort to make money for a year. but by that time not making money has become habitual. when they finally decide to try they find they cant.the other way companies hose themselves is by letting their expenses grow too fast. which almost always means hiring too many people. you usually shouldnt go out and hire 8 people as soon as you raise money at phase 2. usually you want to wait till you have growth and thus usually revenues to justify them. a lot of vcs will encourage you to hire aggressively. vcs generally tell you to spend too much partly because as money people they err on the side of solving problems by spending money and partly because they want you to sell them more of your company in subsequent rounds. dont listen to them.dont make things complicated.i realize it may seem odd to sum up this huge treatise by saying that my overall advice is not to make fundraising too complicated but if you go back and look at this list youll see its basically a simple recipe with a lot of implications and edge cases. avoid investors till you decide to raise money and then when you do talk to them all in parallel prioritized by expected value and accept offers greedily. thats fundraising in one sentence. dont introduce complicated optimizations and dont let investors introduce complications either.fundraising is not what will make you successful. its just a means to an end. your primary goal should be to get it over with and get back to what will make you successful  making things and talking to users  and the path ive described will for most startups be the surest way to that destination.be good take care of yourselves and dont leave the path.notes1 the worst explosions happen when unpromisingseeming startups encounter mediocre investors. good investors dont lead startups on their reputations are too valuable. and startups that seem promising can usually get enough money from good investors that they dont have to talk to mediocre ones. it is the unpromisingseeming startups that have to resort to raising money from mediocre investors. and its particularly damaging when these investors flake because unpromisingseeming startups are usually more desperate for money.not all unpromisingseeming startups do badly. some are merely ugly ducklings in the sense that they violate current startup fashions.2 one yc founder told mei think in general weve done ok at fundraising but i managed to screw up twice at the exact same thing  trying to focus on building the company and fundraising at the same time.3 there is one subtle danger you have to watch out for here which i warn about later beware of getting too high a valuation from an eager investor lest that set an impossibly high target when raising additional money.4 if they really need a meeting then theyre not ready to invest regardless of what they say. theyre still deciding which means youre being asked to come in and convince them. which is fundraising.5 associates at vc firms regularly cold email startups. naive founders think wow a vc is interested in us but an associate is not a vc. they have no decisionmaking power. and while they may introduce startups they like to partners at their firm the partners discriminate against deals that come to them this way. i dont know of a single vc investment that began with an associate coldemailing a startup. if you want to approach a specific firm get an intro to a partner from someone they respect.its ok to talk to an associate if you get an intro to a vc firm or they see you at a demo day and they begin by having an associate vet you. thats not a promising lead and should therefore get low priority but its not as completely worthless as a cold email.because the title associate has gotten a bad reputation a few vc firms have started to give their associates the title partner which can make things very confusing. if youre a yc startup you can ask us whos who otherwise you may have to do some research online. there may be a special title for actual partners. if someone speaks for the firm in the press or a blog on the firms site theyre probably a real partner. if theyre on boards of directors theyre probably a real partner.there are titles between associate and partner including principal and venture partner. the meanings of these titles vary too much to generalize.6 for similar reasons avoid casual conversations with potential acquirers. they can lead to distractions even more dangerous than fundraising. dont even take a meeting with a potential acquirer unless you want to sell your company right now.7 joshua reeves specifically suggests asking each investor to intro you to two more investors.dont ask investors who say no for introductions to other investors. that will in many cases be an antirecommendation.8 this is not always as deliberate as its sounds. a lot of the delays and disconnects between founders and investors are induced by the customs of the venture business which have evolved the way they have because they suit investors interests.9 one yc founder who read a draft of this essay wrotethis is the most important section. i think it might bear stating even more clearly. investors will deliberately affect more interest than they have to preserve optionality. if an investor seems very interested in you they still probably wont invest. the solution for this is to assume the worst  that an investor is just feigning interest  until you get a definite commitment.10 though you should probably pack investor meetings as closely as you can jeff byun mentions one reason not to if you pack investor meetings too closely youll have less time for your pitch to evolve.some founders deliberately schedule a handful of lame investors first to get the bugs out of their pitch.11 there is not an efficient market in this respect. some of the most useless investors are also the highest maintenance.12 incidentally this paragraph is sales 101. if you want to see it in action go talk to a car dealer.13 i know one very smooth founder who used to end investor meetings with so can i count you in delivered as if it were can you pass the salt unless youre very smooth if youre not sure... do not do this yourself. there is nothing more unconvincing for an investor than a nerdy founder trying to deliver the lines meant for a smooth one.investors are fine with funding nerds. so if youre a nerd just try to be a good nerd rather than doing a bad imitation of a smooth salesman.14 ian hogarth suggests a good way to tell how serious potential investors are the resources they expend on you after the first meeting. an investor whos seriously interested will already be working to help you even before theyve committed.15 in principle you might have to think about socalled signalling risk. if a prestigious vc makes a small seed investment in you what if they dont want to invest the next time you raise money other investors might assume that the vc knows you well since theyre an existing investor and if they dont want to invest in your next round that must mean you suck. the reason i say in principle is that in practice signalling hasnt been much of a problem so far. it rarely arises and in the few cases where it does the startup in question usually is doing badly and is doomed anyway.if you have the luxury of choosing among seed investors you can play it safe by excluding vc firms. but it isnt critical to.16 sometimes a competitor will deliberately threaten you with a lawsuit just as you start fundraising because they know youll have to disclose the threat to potential investors and they hope this will make it harder for you to raise money. if this happens it will probably frighten you more than investors. experienced investors know about this trick and know the actual lawsuits rarely happen. so if youre attacked in this way be forthright with investors. theyll be more alarmed if you seem evasive than if you tell them everything.17 a related trick is to claim that theyll only invest contingently on other investors doing so because otherwise youd be undercapitalized. this is almost always bullshit. they cant estimate your minimum capital needs that precisely.18 you wont hire all those 20 people at once and youll probably have some revenues before 18 months are out. but those too are acceptable or at least accepted additions to the margin for error.19 type a fundraising is so much better that it might even be worth doing something different if it gets you there sooner. one yc founder told me that if he were a firsttime founder again hed leave ideas that are upfront capital intensive to founders with established reputations.20 i dont know whether this happens because theyre innumerate or because they believe they have zero ability to predict startup outcomes in which case this behavior at least wouldnt be irrational. in either case the implications are similar.21 if youre a yc startup and you have an investor who for some reason insists that you decide the price any yc partner can estimate a market price for you.22 you should respond in kind when investors behave upstandingly too. when an investor makes you a clean offer with no deadline you have a moral obligation to respond promptly.23 tell the investors talking to you about an a round about the smaller investments you raise as you raise them. you owe them such updates on your cap table and this is also a good way to pressure them to act. they wont like you raising other money and may pressure you to stop but they cant legitimately ask you to commit to them till they also commit to you. if they want you to stop raising money the way to do it is to give you a series a termsheet with a noshop clause.you can relent a little if the potential series a investor has a great reputation and theyre clearly working fast to get you a termsheet particularly if a third party like yc is involved to ensure there are no misunderstandings. but be careful.24 the company is weebly which made it to profitability on a seed investment of 650k. they did try to raise a series a in the fall of 2008 but no doubt partly because it was the fall of 2008 the terms they were offered were so bad that they decided to skip raising an a round.25 another advantage of having one founder take fundraising meetings is that you never have to negotiate in real time which is something inexperienced founders should avoid. one yc founder told meinvestors are professional negotiators and can negotiate on the spot very easily. if only one founder is in the room you can say i need to circle back with my cofounder before making any commitments. i used to do this all the time.26 youll be lucky if fundraising feels pleasant enough to become addictive. more often you have to worry about the other extreme  becoming demoralized when investors reject you. as one very successful yc founder wrote after reading a draft of thisits hard to mentally deal with the sheer scale of rejection in fundraising and if you are not in the right mindset you will fail. users may love you but these supposedly smart investors may not understand you at all. at this point for me rejection still rankles but ive come to accept that investors are just not super thoughtful for the most part and you need to play the game according to certain somewhat depressing rules many of which you are listing in order to win.27 the actual sentence in the king james bible is pride goeth before destruction and an haughty spirit before a fall.

raising money is the second hardest part of starting a startup. the hardest part is making something people want most startups that die die because they didnt do that. but the second biggest cause of death is probably the difficulty of raising money. fundraising is brutal.one reason its so brutal is simply the brutality of markets. people whove spent most of their lives in schools or big companies may not have been exposed to that. professors and bosses usually feel some sense of responsibility toward you if you make a valiant effort and fail theyll cut you a break. markets are less forgiving. customers dont care how hard you worked only whether you solved their problems.investors evaluate startups the way customers evaluate products not the way bosses evaluate employees. if youre making a valiant effort and failing maybe theyll invest in your next startup but not this one.but raising money from investors is harder than selling to customers because there are so few of them. theres nothing like an efficient market. youre unlikely to have more than 10 who are interested its difficult to talk to more. so the randomness of any one investors behavior can really affect you.problem number 3 investors are very random. all investors including us are by ordinary standards incompetent. we constantly have to make decisions about things we dont understand and more often than not were wrong.and yet a lot is at stake. the amounts invested by different types of investors vary from five thousand dollars to fifty million but the amount usually seems large for whatever type of investor it is. investment decisions are big decisions.that combinationmaking big decisions about things they dont understandtends to make investors very skittish. vcs are notorious for leading founders on. some of the more unscrupulous do it deliberately. but even the most wellintentioned investors can behave in a way that would seem crazy in everyday life. one day theyre full of enthusiasm and seem ready to write you a check on the spot the next they wont return your phone calls. theyre not playing games with you. they just cant make up their minds. 1if that werent bad enough these wildly fluctuating nodes are all linked together. startup investors all know one another and though they hate to admit it the biggest factor in their opinion of you is the opinion of other investors. 2 talk about a recipe for an unstable system. you get the opposite of the damping that the feargreed balance usually produces in markets. no one is interested in a startup thats a bargain because everyone else hates it.so the inefficient market you get because there are so few players is exacerbated by the fact that they act less than independently. the result is a system like some kind of primitive multicelled sea creature where you irritate one extremity and the whole thing contracts violently.y combinator is working to fix this. were trying to increase the number of investors just as were increasing the number of startups. we hope that as the number of both increases well get something more like an efficient market. as t approaches infinity demo day approaches an auction.unfortunately t is still very far from infinity. what does a startup do now in the imperfect world we currently inhabit the most important thing is not to let fundraising get you down. startups live or die on morale. if you let the difficulty of raising money destroy your morale it will become a selffulfilling prophecy.bootstrapping  consultingsome wouldbe founders may by now be thinking why deal with investors at all if raising money is so painful why do itone answer to that is obvious because you need money to live on. its a fine idea in principle to finance your startup with its own revenues but you cant create instant customers. whatever you make you have to sell a certain amount to break even. it will take time to grow your sales to that point and its hard to predict till you try how long it will take.we could not have bootstrapped viaweb for example. we charged quite a lot for our softwareabout 140 per user per monthbut it was at least a year before our revenues would have covered even our paltry costs. we didnt have enough saved to live on for a year.if you factor out the bootstrapped companies that were actually funded by their founders through savings or a day job the remainder either a got really lucky which is hard to do on demand or b began life as consulting companies and gradually transformed themselves into product companies.consulting is the only option you can count on. but consulting is far from free money. its not as painful as raising money from investors perhaps but the pain is spread over a longer period. years probably. and for many types of startup that delay could be fatal. if youre working on something so unusual that no one else is likely to think of it you can take your time. joshua schachter gradually built delicious on the side while working on wall street. he got away with it because no one else realized it was a good idea. but if you were building something as obviously necessary as online store software at about the same time as viaweb and you were working on it on the side while spending most of your time on client work you were not in a good position.bootstrapping sounds great in principle but this apparently verdant territory is one from which few startups emerge alive. the mere fact that bootstrapped startups tend to be famous on that account should set off alarm bells. if it worked so well it would be the norm. 3bootstrapping may get easier because starting a company is getting cheaper. but i dont think well ever reach the point where most startups can do without outside funding. technology tends to get dramatically cheaper but living expenses dont.the upshot is you can choose your pain either the short sharp pain of raising money or the chronic ache of consulting. for a given total amount of pain raising money is the better choice because new technology is usually more valuable now than later.but although for most startups raising money will be the lesser evil its still a pretty big evilso big that it can easily kill you. not merely in the obvious sense that if you fail to raise money you might have to shut the company down but because the process of raising money itself can kill you.to survive it you need a set of techniques mostly orthogonal to the ones used in convincing investors just as mountain climbers need to know survival techniques that are mostly orthogonal to those used in physically getting up and down mountains.1. have low expectations.the reason raising money destroys so many startups morale is not simply that its hard but that its so much harder than they expected. what kills you is the disappointment. and the lower your expectations the harder it is to be disappointed.startup founders tend to be optimistic. this can work well in technology at least some of the time but its the wrong way to approach raising money. better to assume investors will always let you down. acquirers too while were at it. at yc one of our secondary mantras is deals fall through. no matter what deal you have going on assume it will fall through. the predictive power of this simple rule is amazing.there will be a tendency as a deal progresses to start to believe it will happen and then to depend on it happening. you must resist this. tie yourself to the mast. this is what kills you. deals do not have a trajectory like most other human interactions where shared plans solidify linearly over time. deals often fall through at the last moment. often the other party doesnt really think about what they want till the last moment. so you cant use your everyday intuitions about shared plans as a guide. when it comes to deals you have to consciously turn them off and become pathologically cynical.this is harder to do than it sounds. its very flattering when eminent investors seem interested in funding you. its easy to start to believe that raising money will be quick and straightforward. but it hardly ever is.2. keep working on your startup.it sounds obvious to say that you should keep working on your startup while raising money. actually this is hard to do. most startups dont manage to.raising money has a mysterious capacity to suck up all your attention. even if you only have one meeting a day with investors somehow that one meeting will burn up your whole day. it costs not just the time of the actual meeting but the time getting there and back and the time preparing for it beforehand and thinking about it afterward.the best way to survive the distraction of meeting with investors is probably to partition the company to pick one founder to deal with investors while the others keep the company going. this works better when a startup has 3 founders than 2 and better when the leader of the company is not also the lead developer. in the best case the company keeps moving forward at about half speed.thats the best case though. more often than not the company comes to a standstill while raising money. and that is dangerous for so many reasons. raising money always takes longer than you expect. what seems like its going to be a 2 week interruption turns into a 4 month interruption. that can be very demoralizing. and worse still it can make you less attractive to investors. they want to invest in companies that are dynamic. a company that hasnt done anything new in 4 months doesnt seem dynamic so they start to lose interest. investors rarely grasp this but much of what theyre responding to when they lose interest in a startup is the damage done by their own indecision.the solution put the startup first. fit meetings with investors into the spare moments in your development schedule rather than doing development in the spare moments between meetings with investors. if you keep the company moving forwardreleasing new features increasing traffic doing deals getting written aboutthose investor meetings are more likely to be productive. not just because your startup will seem more alive but also because it will be better for your own morale which is one of the main ways investors judge you.3. be conservative.as conditions get worse the optimal strategy becomes more conservative. when things go well you can take risks when things are bad you want to play it safe.i advise approaching fundraising as if it were always going badly. the reason is that between your ability to delude yourself and the wildly unstable nature of the system youre dealing with things probably either already are or could easily become much worse than they seem.what i tell most startups we fund is that if someone reputable offers you funding on reasonable terms take it. there have been startups that ignored this advice and got away with itstartups that ignored a good offer in the hope of getting a better one and actually did. but in the same position id give the same advice again. who knows how many bullets were in the gun they were playing russian roulette withcorollary if an investor seems interested dont just let them sit. you cant assume someone interested in investing will stay interested. in fact you cant even tell they cant even tell if theyre really interested till you try to convert that interest into money. so if you have hot prospect either close them now or write them off. and unless you already have enough funding that reduces to close them now.startups dont win by getting great funding rounds but by making great products. so finish raising money and get back to work.4. be flexible.there are two questions vcs ask that you shouldnt answer who else are you talking to and how much are you trying to raisevcs dont expect you to answer the first question. they ask it just in case. 4 they do seem to expect an answer to the second. but i dont think you should just tell them a number. not as a way to play games with them but because you shouldnt have a fixed amount you need to raise.the custom of a startup needing a fixed amount of funding is an obsolete one left over from the days when startups were more expensive. a company that needed to build a factory or hire 50 people obviously needed to raise a certain minimum amount. but few technology startups are in that position today.we advise startups to tell investors there are several different routes they could take depending on how much they raised. as little as 50k could pay for food and rent for the founders for a year. a couple hundred thousand would let them get office space and hire some smart people they know from school. a couple million would let them really blow this thing out. the message and not just the message but the fact should be were going to succeed no matter what. raising more money just lets us do it faster.if youre raising an angel round the size of the round can even change on the fly. in fact its just as well to make the round small initially then expand as needed rather than trying to raise a large round and risk losing the investors you already have if you cant raise the full amount. you may even want to do a rolling close where the round has no predetermined size but instead you sell stock to investors one at a time as they say yes. that helps break deadlocks because you can start as soon as the first one is ready to buy. 55. be independent.a startup with a couple founders in their early twenties can have expenses so low that they could be profitable on as little as 2000 per month. thats negligible as corporate revenues go but the effect on your morale and your bargaining position is anything but. at yc we use the phrase ramen profitable to describe the situation where youre making just enough to pay your living expenses. once you cross into ramen profitable everything changes. you may still need investment to make it big but you dont need it this month.you cant plan when you start a startup how long it will take to become profitable. but if you find yourself in a position where a little more effort expended on sales would carry you over the threshold of ramen profitable do it.investors like it when youre ramen profitable. it shows youve thought about making money instead of just working on amusing technical problems it shows you have the discipline to keep your expenses low but above all it means you dont need them.there is nothing investors like more than a startup that seems like its going to succeed even without them. investors like it when they can help a startup but they dont like startups that would die without that help.at yc we spend a lot of time trying to predict how the startups weve funded will do because were trying to learn how to pick winners. weve now watched the trajectories of so many startups that were getting better at predicting them. and when were talking about startups we think are likely to succeed what we find ourselves saying is things like oh those guys can take care of themselves. theyll be fine. not those guys are really smart or those guys are working on a great idea. 6 when we predict good outcomes for startups the qualities that come up in the supporting arguments are toughness adaptability determination. which means to the extent were correct those are the qualities you need to win.investors know this at least unconsciously. the reason they like it when you dont need them is not simply that they like what they cant have but because that quality is what makes founders succeed.sam altman has it. you could parachute him into an island full of cannibals and come back in 5 years and hed be the king. if youre sam altman you dont have to be profitable to convey to investors that youll succeed with or without them. he wasnt and he did. not everyone has sams dealmaking ability. i myself dont. but if you dont you can let the numbers speak for you.6. dont take rejection personally.getting rejected by investors can make you start to doubt yourself. after all theyre more experienced than you. if they think your startup is lame arent they probably rightmaybe maybe not. the way to handle rejection is with precision. you shouldnt simply ignore rejection. it might mean something. but you shouldnt automatically get demoralized either.to understand what rejection means you have to understand first of all how common it is. statistically the average vc is a rejection machine. david hornik a partner at august told methe numbers for me ended up being something like 500 to 800 plans received and read somewhere between 50 and 100 initial 1 hour meetings held about 20 companies that i got interested in about 5 that i got serious about and did a bunch of work 1 to 2 deals done in a year. so the odds are against you. you may be a great entrepreneur working on interesting stuff etc. but it is still incredibly unlikely that you get funded.this is less true with angels but vcs reject practically everyone. the structure of their business means a partner does at most 2 new investments a year no matter how many good startups approach him.in addition to the odds being terrible the average investor is as i mentioned a pretty bad judge of startups. its harder to judge startups than most other things because great startup ideas tend to seem wrong. a good startup idea has to be not just good but novel. and to be both good and novel an idea probably has to seem bad to most people or someone would already be doing it and it wouldnt be novel.that makes judging startups harder than most other things one judges. you have to be an intellectual contrarian to be a good startup investor. thats a problem for vcs most of whom are not particularly imaginative. vcs are mostly money guys not people who make things. 7 angels are better at appreciating novel ideas because most were founders themselves.so when you get a rejection use the data thats in it and not whats not. if an investor gives you specific reasons for not investing look at your startup and ask if theyre right. if theyre real problems fix them. but dont just take their word for it. youre supposed to be the domain expert you have to decide.though a rejection doesnt necessarily tell you anything about your startup it does suggest your pitch could be improved. figure out whats not working and change it. dont just think investors are stupid. often they are but figure out precisely where you lose them.dont let rejections pile up as a depressing undifferentiated heap. sort them and analyze them and then instead of thinking no one likes us youll know precisely how big a problem you have and what to do about it.7. be able to downshift into consulting if appropriate.consulting as i mentioned is a dangerous way to finance a startup. but its better than dying. its a bit like anaerobic respiration not the optimum solution for the long term but it can save you from an immediate threat. if youre having trouble raising money from investors at all it could save you to be able to shift toward consulting.this works better for some startups than others. it wouldnt have been a natural fit for say google but if your company was making software for building web sites you could degrade fairly gracefully into consulting by building sites for clients with it.so long as you were careful not to get sucked permanently into consulting this could even have advantages. youd understand your users well if you were using the software for them. plus as a consulting company you might be able to get bigname users using your software that you wouldnt have gotten as a product company.at viaweb we were forced to operate like a consulting company initially because we were so desperate for users that wed offer to build merchants sites for them if theyd sign up. but we never charged for such work because we didnt want them to start treating us like actual consultants and calling us every time they wanted something changed on their site. we knew we had to stay a product company because only that scales.8. avoid inexperienced investors.though novice investors seem unthreatening they can be the most dangerous sort because theyre so nervous. especially in proportion to the amount they invest. raising 20000 from a firsttime angel investor can be as much work as raising 2 million from a vc fund.their lawyers are generally inexperienced too. but while the investors can admit they dont know what theyre doing their lawyers cant. one yc startup negotiated terms for a tiny round with an angel only to receive a 70page agreement from his lawyer. and since the lawyer could never admit in front of his client that hed screwed up he instead had to insist on retaining all the draconian terms in it so the deal fell through.of course someone has to take money from novice investors or there would never be any experienced ones. but if you do either a drive the process yourself including supplying the paperwork or b use them only to fill up a larger round led by someone else.9. know where you stand.the most dangerous thing about investors is their indecisiveness. the worst case scenario is the long no the no that comes after months of meetings. rejections from investors are like design flaws inevitable but much less costly if you discover them early.so while youre talking to investors constantly look for signs of where you stand. how likely are they to offer you a term sheet what do they have to be convinced of first you shouldnt necessarily always be asking these questions outrightthat could get annoyingbut you should always be collecting data about them.investors tend to resist committing except to the extent you push them to. its in their interest to collect the maximum amount of information while making the minimum number of decisions. the best way to force them to act is of course competing investors. but you can also apply some force by focusing the discussion by asking what specific questions they need answered to make up their minds and then answering them. if you get through several obstacles and they keep raising new ones assume that ultimately theyre going to flake.you have to be disciplined when collecting data about investors intentions. otherwise their desire to lead you on will combine with your own desire to be led on to produce completely inaccurate impressions.use the data to weight your strategy. youll probably be talking to several investors. focus on the ones that are most likely to say yes. the value of a potential investor is a combination of how good it would be if they said yes and how likely they are to say it. put the most weight on the second factor. partly because the most important quality in an investor is simply investing. but also because as i mentioned the biggest factor in investors opinion of you is other investors opinion of you. if youre talking to several investors and you manage to get one over the threshold of saying yes it will make the others much more interested. so youre not sacrificing the lukewarm investors if you focus on the hot ones convincing the hot investors is the best way to convince the lukewarm ones.futureim hopeful things wont always be so awkward. i hope that as startups get cheaper and the number of investors increases raising money will become if not easy at least straightforward.in the meantime the brokenness of the funding process offers a big opportunity. most investors have no idea how dangerous they are. theyd be surprised to hear that raising money from them is something that has to be treated as a threat to a companys survival. they just think they need a little more information to make up their minds. they dont get that there are 10 other investors who also want a little more information and that the process of talking to them all can bring a startup to a standstill for months.because investors dont understand the cost of dealing with them they dont realize how much room there is for a potential competitor to undercut them. i know from my own experience how much faster investors could decide because weve brought our own time down to 20 minutes 5 minutes of reading an application plus a 10 minute interview plus 5 minutes of discussion. if you were investing more money youd want to take longer of course. but if we can decide in 20 minutes should it take anyone longer than a couple daysopportunities like this dont sit unexploited forever even in an industry as conservative as venture capital. so either existing investors will start to make up their minds faster or new investors will emerge who do.in the meantime founders have to treat raising money as a dangerous process. fortunately i can fix the biggest danger right here. the biggest danger is surprise. its that startups will underestimate the difficulty of raising moneythat theyll cruise through all the initial steps but when they turn to raising money theyll find it surprisingly hard get demoralized and give up. so im telling you in advance raising money is hard.notes1 when investors cant make up their minds they sometimes describe it as if it were a property of the startup. youre too early for us they sometimes say. but which of them if they were taken back in a time machine to the hour google was founded wouldnt offer to invest at any valuation the founders chose an hour old is not too early if its the right startup. what youre too early really means is we cant figure out yet whether youll succeed.2 investors influence one another both directly and indirectly. they influence one another directly through the buzz that surrounds a hot startup. but they also influence one another indirectly through the founders. when a lot of investors are interested in you it increases your confidence in a way that makes you much more attractive to investors.no vc will admit theyre influenced by buzz. some genuinely arent. but there are few who can say theyre not influenced by confidence.3 one vc who read this essay wrotewe try to avoid companies that got bootstrapped with consulting. it creates very bad behaviorsinstincts that are hard to erase from a companys culture.4 the optimal way to answer the first question is to say that it would be improper to name names while simultaneously implying that youre talking to a bunch of other vcs who are all about to give you term sheets. if youre the sort of person who understands how to do that go ahead. if not dont even try. nothing annoys vcs more than clumsy efforts to manipulate them.5 the disadvantage of expanding a round on the fly is that the valuation is fixed at the start so if you get a sudden rush of interest you may have to decide between turning some investors away and selling more of the company than you meant to. thats a good problem to have however.6 i wouldnt say that intelligence doesnt matter in startups. were only comparing yc startups whove already made it over a certain threshold.7 but not all are. though most vcs are suits at heart the most successful ones tend not to be. oddly enough the best vcs tend to be the least vclike.

two years ago i wrote about what i called a huge unexploited opportunity in startup funding the growing disconnect between vcs whose current business model requires them to invest large amounts and a large class of startups that need less than they used to. increasingly startups want a couple hundred thousand dollars not a couple million. 1the opportunity is a lot less unexploited now. investors have poured into this territory from both directions. vcs are much more likely to make angelsized investments than they were a year ago. and meanwhile the past year has seen a dramatic increase in a new type of investor the superangel who operates like an angel but using other peoples money like a vc.though a lot of investors are entering this territory there is still room for more. the distribution of investors should mirror the distribution of startups which has the usual power law dropoff. so there should be a lot more people investing tens or hundreds of thousands than millions. 2in fact it may be good for angels that there are more people doing angelsized deals because if angel rounds become more legitimate then startups may start to opt for angel rounds even when they could if they wanted raise series a rounds from vcs. one reason startups prefer series a rounds is that theyre more prestigious. but if angel investors become more active and better known theyll increasingly be able to compete with vcs in brand.of course prestige isnt the main reason to prefer a series a round. a startup will probably get more attention from investors in a series a round than an angel round. so if a startup is choosing between an angel round and an a round from a good vc fund i usually advise them to take the a round. 3but while series a rounds arent going away i think vcs should be more worried about superangels than vice versa. despite their name the superangels are really mini vc funds and they clearly have existing vcs in their sights.they would seem to have history on their side. the pattern here seems the same one we see when startups and established companies enter a new market. online video becomes possible and youtube plunges right in while existing media companies embrace it only halfwillingly driven more by fear than hope and aiming more to protect their turf than to do great things for users. ditto for paypal. this pattern is repeated over and over and its usually the invaders who win. in this case the superangels are the invaders. angel rounds are their whole business as online video was for youtube. whereas vcs who make angel investments mostly do it as a way to generate deal flow for series a rounds. 4on the other hand startup investing is a very strange business. nearly all the returns are concentrated in a few big winners. if the superangels merely fail to invest in and to some extent produce the big winners theyll be out of business even if they invest in all the others.vcswhy dont vcs start doing smaller series a rounds the sticking point is board seats. in a traditional series a round the partner whose deal it is takes a seat on the startups board. if we assume the average startup runs for 6 years and a partner can bear to be on 12 boards at once then a vc fund can do 2 series a deals per partner per year.it has always seemed to me the solution is to take fewer board seats. you dont have to be on the board to help a startup. maybe vcs feel they need the power that comes with board membership to ensure their money isnt wasted. but have they tested that theory unless theyve tried not taking board seats and found their returns are lower theyre not bracketing the problem.im not saying vcs dont help startups. the good ones help them a lot. what im saying is that the kind of help that matters you may not have to be a board member to give. 5how will this all play out some vcs will probably adapt by doing more smaller deals. i wouldnt be surprised if by streamlining their selection process and taking fewer board seats vc funds could do 2 to 3 times as many series a rounds with no loss of quality.but other vcs will make no more than superficial changes. vcs are conservative and the threat to them isnt mortal. the vc funds that dont adapt wont be violently displaced. theyll edge gradually into a different business without realizing it. theyll still do what they will call series a rounds but these will increasingly be de facto series b rounds. 6in such rounds they wont get the 25 to 40 of the company they do now. you dont give up as much of the company in later rounds unless something is seriously wrong. since the vcs who dont adapt will be investing later their returns from winners may be smaller. but investing later should also mean they have fewer losers. so their ratio of risk to return may be the same or even better. theyll just have become a different more conservative type of investment.angelsin the big angel rounds that increasingly compete with series a rounds the investors wont take as much equity as vcs do now. and vcs who try to compete with angels by doing more smaller deals will probably find they have to take less equity to do it. which is good news for founders theyll get to keep more of the company.the deal terms of angel rounds will become less restrictive toonot just less restrictive than series a terms but less restrictive than angel terms have traditionally been.in the future angel rounds will less often be for specific amounts or have a lead investor. in the old days the standard m.o. for startups was to find one angel to act as the lead investor. youd negotiate a round size and valuation with the lead whod supply some but not all of the money. then the startup and the lead would cooperate to find the rest.the future of angel rounds looks more like this instead of a fixed round size startups will do a rolling close where they take money from investors one at a time till they feel they have enough. 7 and though theres going to be one investor who gives them the first check and his or her help in recruiting other investors will certainly be welcome this initial investor will no longer be the lead in the old sense of managing the round. the startup will now do that themselves.there will continue to be lead investors in the sense of investors who take the lead in advising a startup. they may also make the biggest investment. but they wont always have to be the one terms are negotiated with or be the first money in as they have in the past. standardized paperwork will do away with the need to negotiate anything except the valuation and that will get easier too.if multiple investors have to share a valuation it will be whatever the startup can get from the first one to write a check limited by their guess at whether this will make later investors balk. but there may not have to be just one valuation. startups are increasingly raising money on convertible notes and convertible notes have not valuations but at most valuation caps caps on what the effective valuation will be when the debt converts to equity in a later round or upon acquisition if that happens first. thats an important difference because it means a startup could do multiple notes at once with different caps. this is now starting to happen and i predict it will become more common.sheepthe reason things are moving this way is that the old way sucked for startups. leads could and did use a fixed size round as a legitimateseeming way of saying what all founders hate to hear ill invest if other people will. most investors unable to judge startups for themselves rely instead on the opinions of other investors. if everyone wants in they want in too if not not. founders hate this because its a recipe for deadlock and delay is the thing a startup can least afford. most investors know this m.o. is lame and few say openly that theyre doing it. but the craftier ones achieve the same result by offering to lead rounds of fixed size and supplying only part of the money. if the startup cant raise the rest the lead is out too. how could they go ahead with the deal the startup would be underfundedin the future investors will increasingly be unable to offer investment subject to contingencies like other people investing. or rather investors who do that will get last place in line. startups will go to them only to fill up rounds that are mostly subscribed. and since hot startups tend to have rounds that are oversubscribed being last in line means theyll probably miss the hot deals. hot deals and successful startups are not identical but there is a significant correlation. 8 so investors who wont invest unilaterally will have lower returns.investors will probably find they do better when deprived of this crutch anyway. chasing hot deals doesnt make investors choose better it just makes them feel better about their choices. ive seen feeding frenzies both form and fall apart many times and as far as i can tell theyre mostly random. 9 if investors can no longer rely on their herd instincts theyll have to think more about each startup before investing. they may be surprised how well this works.deadlock wasnt the only disadvantage of letting a lead investor manage an angel round. the investors would not infrequently collude to push down the valuation. and rounds took too long to close because however motivated the lead was to get the round closed he was not a tenth as motivated as the startup.increasingly startups are taking charge of their own angel rounds. only a few do so far but i think we can already declare the old way dead because those few are the best startups. theyre the ones in a position to tell investors how the round is going to work. and if the startups you want to invest in do things a certain way what difference does it make what the others dotractionin fact it may be slightly misleading to say that angel rounds will increasingly take the place of series a rounds. whats really happening is that startupcontrolled rounds are taking the place of investorcontrolled rounds.this is an instance of a very important metatrend one that y combinator itself has been based on from the beginning founders are becoming increasingly powerful relative to investors. so if you want to predict what the future of venture funding will be like just ask how would founders like it to be one by one all the things founders dislike about raising money are going to get eliminated. 10using that heuristic ill predict a couple more things. one is that investors will increasingly be unable to wait for startups to have traction before they put in significant money. its hard to predict in advance which startups will succeed. so most investors prefer if they can to wait till the startup is already succeeding then jump in quickly with an offer. startups hate this as well partly because it tends to create deadlock and partly because it seems kind of slimy. if youre a promising startup but dont yet have significant growth all the investors are your friends in words but few are in actions. they all say they love you but they all wait to invest. then when you start to see growth they claim they were your friend all along and are aghast at the thought youd be so disloyal as to leave them out of your round. if founders become more powerful theyll be able to make investors give them more money upfront.the worst variant of this behavior is the tranched deal where the investor makes a small initial investment with more to follow if the startup does well. in effect this structure gives the investor a free option on the next round which theyll only take if its worse for the startup than they could get in the open market. tranched deals are an abuse. theyre increasingly rare and theyre going to get rarer. 11investors dont like trying to predict which startups will succeed but increasingly theyll have to. though the way that happens wont necessarily be that the behavior of existing investors will change it may instead be that theyll be replaced by other investors with different behaviorthat investors who understand startups well enough to take on the hard problem of predicting their trajectory will tend to displace suits whose skills lie more in raising money from lps.speedthe other thing founders hate most about fundraising is how long it takes. so as founders become more powerful rounds should start to close faster.fundraising is still terribly distracting for startups. if youre a founder in the middle of raising a round the round is the top idea in your mind which means working on the company isnt. if a round takes 2 months to close which is reasonably fast by present standards that means 2 months during which the company is basically treading water. thats the worst thing a startup could do.so if investors want to get the best deals the way to do it will be to close faster. investors dont need weeks to make up their minds anyway. we decide based on about 10 minutes of reading an application plus 10 minutes of in person interview and we only regret about 10 of our decisions. if we can decide in 20 minutes surely the next round of investors can decide in a couple days. 12there are a lot of institutionalized delays in startup funding the multiweek mating dance with investors the distinction between termsheets and deals the fact that each series a has enormously elaborate custom paperwork. both founders and investors tend to take these for granted. its the way things have always been. but ultimately the reason these delays exist is that theyre to the advantage of investors. more time gives investors more information about a startups trajectory and it also tends to make startups more pliable in negotiations since theyre usually short of money.these conventions werent designed to drag out the funding process but thats why theyre allowed to persist. slowness is to the advantage of investors who have in the past been the ones with the most power. but there is no need for rounds to take months or even weeks to close and once founders realize that its going to stop. not just in angel rounds but in series a rounds too. the future is simple deals with standard terms done quickly.one minor abuse that will get corrected in the process is option pools. in a traditional series a round before the vcs invest they make the company set aside a block of stock for future hiresusually between 10 and 30 of the company. the point is to ensure this dilution is borne by the existing shareholders. the practice isnt dishonest founders know whats going on. but it makes deals unnecessarily complicated. in effect the valuation is 2 numbers. theres no need to keep doing this. 13the final thing founders want is to be able to sell some of their own stock in later rounds. this wont be a change because the practice is now quite common. a lot of investors hated the idea but the world hasnt exploded as a result so it will happen more and more openly.surpriseive talked here about a bunch of changes that will be forced on investors as founders become more powerful. now the good news investors may actually make more money as a result.a couple days ago an interviewer asked me if founders having more power would be better or worse for the world. i was surprised because id never considered that question. better or worse its happening. but after a seconds reflection the answer seemed obvious. founders understand their companies better than investors and it has to be better if the people with more knowledge have more power.one of the mistakes novice pilots make is overcontrolling the aircraft applying corrections too vigorously so the aircraft oscillates about the desired configuration instead of approaching it asymptotically. it seems probable that investors have till now on average been overcontrolling their portfolio companies. in a lot of startups the biggest source of stress for the founders is not competitors but investors. certainly it was for us at viaweb. and this is not a new phenomenon investors were james watts biggest problem too. if having less power prevents investors from overcontrolling startups it should be better not just for founders but for investors too.investors may end up with less stock per startup but startups will probably do better with founders more in control and there will almost certainly be more of them. investors all compete with one another for deals but they arent one anothers main competitor. our main competitor is employers. and so far that competitor is crushing us. only a tiny fraction of people who could start a startup do. nearly all customers choose the competing product a job. why well lets look at the product were offering. an unbiased review would go something like thisstarting a startup gives you more freedom and the opportunity to make a lot more money than a job but its also hard work and at times very stressful.much of the stress comes from dealing with investors. if reforming the investment process removed that stress wed make our product much more attractive. the kind of people who make good startup founders dont mind dealing with technical problemsthey enjoy technical problemsbut they hate the type of problems investors cause.investors have no idea that when they maltreat one startup theyre preventing 10 others from happening but they are. indirectly but they are. so when investors stop trying to squeeze a little more out of their existing deals theyll find theyre net ahead because so many more new deals appear.one of our axioms at y combinator is not to think of deal flow as a zerosum game. our main focus is to encourage more startups to happen not to win a larger share of the existing stream. weve found this principle very useful and we think as it spreads outward it will help later stage investors as well.make something people want applies to us too.notes1 in this essay im talking mainly about software startups. these points dont apply to types of startups that are still expensive to start e.g. in energy or biotech.even the cheap kinds of startups will generally raise large amounts at some point when they want to hire a lot of people. what has changed is how much they can get done before that.2 its not the distribution of good startups that has a power law dropoff but the distribution of potentially good startups which is to say good deals. there are lots of potential winners from which a few actual winners emerge with superlinear certainty.3 as i was writing this i asked some founders whod taken series a rounds from top vc funds whether it was worth it and they unanimously said yes.the quality of investor is more important than the type of round though. id take an angel round from good angels over a series a from a mediocre vc.4 founders also worry that taking an angel investment from a vc means theyll look bad if the vc declines to participate in the next round. the trend of vc angel investing is so new that its hard to say how justified this worry is.another danger pointed out by mitch kapor is that if vcs are only doing angel deals to generate series a deal flow then their incentives arent aligned with the founders. the founders want the valuation of the next round to be high and the vcs want it to be low. again hard to say yet how much of a problem this will be.5 josh kopelman pointed out that another way to be on fewer boards at once is to take board seats for shorter periods.6 google was in this respect as so many others the pattern for the future. it would be great for vcs if the similarity extended to returns. thats probably too much to hope for but the returns may be somewhat higher as i explain later.7 doing a rolling close doesnt mean the company is always raising money. that would be a distraction. the point of a rolling close is to make fundraising take less time not more. with a classic fixed sized round you dont get any money till all the investors agree and that often creates a situation where they all sit waiting for the others to act. a rolling close usually prevents this.8 there are two nonexclusive causes of hot deals the quality of the company and domino effects among investors. the former is obviously a better predictor of success.9 some of the randomness is concealed by the fact that investment is a self fulfilling prophecy.10 the shift in power to founders is exaggerated now because its a sellers market. on the next downtick it will seem like i overstated the case. but on the next uptick after that founders will seem more powerful than ever.11 more generally it will become less common for the same investor to invest in successive rounds except when exercising an option to maintain their percentage. when the same investor invests in successive rounds it often means the startup isnt getting market price. they may not care they may prefer to work with an investor they already know but as the investment market becomes more efficient it will become increasingly easy to get market price if they want it. which in turn means the investment community will tend to become more stratified.12 the two 10 minuteses have 3 weeks between them so founders can get cheap plane tickets but except for that they could be adjacent.13 im not saying option pools themselves will go away. theyre an administrative convenience. what will go away is investors requiring them.

everyone knows that to do great work you need both natural ability and determination. but theres a third ingredient thats not as well understood an obsessive interest in a particular topic.to explain this point i need to burn my reputation with some group of people and im going to choose bus ticket collectors. there are people who collect old bus tickets. like many collectors they have an obsessive interest in the minutiae of what they collect. they can keep track of distinctions between different types of bus tickets that would be hard for the rest of us to remember. because we dont care enough. whats the point of spending so much time thinking about old bus ticketswhich leads us to the second feature of this kind of obsession there is no point. a bus ticket collectors love is disinterested. theyre not doing it to impress us or to make themselves rich but for its own sake.when you look at the lives of people whove done great work you see a consistent pattern. they often begin with a bus ticket collectors obsessive interest in something that would have seemed pointless to most of their contemporaries. one of the most striking features of darwins book about his voyage on the beagle is the sheer depth of his interest in natural history. his curiosity seems infinite. ditto for ramanujan sitting by the hour working out on his slate what happens to series.its a mistake to think they were laying the groundwork for the discoveries they made later. theres too much intention in that metaphor. like bus ticket collectors they were doing it because they liked it.but there is a difference between ramanujan and a bus ticket collector. series matter and bus tickets dont.if i had to put the recipe for genius into one sentence that might be it to have a disinterested obsession with something that matters.arent i forgetting about the other two ingredients less than you might think. an obsessive interest in a topic is both a proxy for ability and a substitute for determination. unless you have sufficient mathematical aptitude you wont find series interesting. and when youre obsessively interested in something you dont need as much determination you dont need to push yourself as hard when curiosity is pulling you.an obsessive interest will even bring you luck to the extent anything can. chance as pasteur said favors the prepared mind and if theres one thing an obsessed mind is its prepared.the disinterestedness of this kind of obsession is its most important feature. not just because its a filter for earnestness but because it helps you discover new ideas.the paths that lead to new ideas tend to look unpromising. if they looked promising other people would already have explored them. how do the people who do great work discover these paths that others overlook the popular story is that they simply have better vision because theyre so talented they see paths that others miss. but if you look at the way great discoveries are made thats not what happens. darwin didnt pay closer attention to individual species than other people because he saw that this would lead to great discoveries and they didnt. he was just really really interested in such things.darwin couldnt turn it off. neither could ramanujan. they didnt discover the hidden paths that they did because they seemed promising but because they couldnt help it. thats what allowed them to follow paths that someone who was merely ambitious would have ignored.what rational person would decide that the way to write great novels was to begin by spending several years creating an imaginary elvish language like tolkien or visiting every household in southwestern britain like trollope no one including tolkien and trollope.the bus ticket theory is similar to carlyles famous definition of genius as an infinite capacity for taking pains. but there are two differences. the bus ticket theory makes it clear that the source of this infinite capacity for taking pains is not infinite diligence as carlyle seems to have meant but the sort of infinite interest that collectors have. it also adds an important qualification an infinite capacity for taking pains about something that matters.so what matters you can never be sure. its precisely because no one can tell in advance which paths are promising that you can discover new ideas by working on what youre interested in.but there are some heuristics you can use to guess whether an obsession might be one that matters. for example its more promising if youre creating something rather than just consuming something someone else creates. its more promising if something youre interested in is difficult especially if its more difficult for other people than it is for you. and the obsessions of talented people are more likely to be promising. when talented people become interested in random things theyre not truly random.but you can never be sure. in fact heres an interesting idea thats also rather alarming if its true it may be that to do great work you also have to waste a lot of time.in many different areas reward is proportionate to risk. if that rule holds here then the way to find paths that lead to truly great work is to be willing to expend a lot of effort on things that turn out to be every bit as unpromising as they seem.im not sure if this is true. on one hand it seems surprisingly difficult to waste your time so long as youre working hard on something interesting. so much of what you do ends up being useful. but on the other hand the rule about the relationship between risk and reward is so powerful that it seems to hold wherever risk occurs. newtons case at least suggests that the riskreward rule holds here. hes famous for one particular obsession of his that turned out to be unprecedentedly fruitful using math to describe the world. but he had two other obsessions alchemy and theology that seem to have been complete wastes of time. he ended up net ahead. his bet on what we now call physics paid off so well that it more than compensated for the other two. but were the other two necessary in the sense that he had to take big risks to make such big discoveries i dont know.heres an even more alarming idea might one make all bad bets it probably happens quite often. but we dont know how often because these people dont become famous.its not merely that the returns from following a path are hard to predict. they change dramatically over time. 1830 was a really good time to be obsessively interested in natural history. if darwin had been born in 1709 instead of 1809 we might never have heard of him.what can one do in the face of such uncertainty one solution is to hedge your bets which in this case means to follow the obviously promising paths instead of your own private obsessions. but as with any hedge youre decreasing reward when you decrease risk. if you forgo working on what you like in order to follow some more conventionally ambitious path you might miss something wonderful that youd otherwise have discovered. that too must happen all the time perhaps even more often than the genius whose bets all fail.the other solution is to let yourself be interested in lots of different things. you dont decrease your upside if you switch between equally genuine interests based on which seems to be working so far. but there is a danger here too if you work on too many different projects you might not get deeply enough into any of them.one interesting thing about the bus ticket theory is that it may help explain why different types of people excel at different kinds of work. interest is much more unevenly distributed than ability. if natural ability is all you need to do great work and natural ability is evenly distributed you have to invent elaborate theories to explain the skewed distributions we see among those who actually do great work in various fields. but it may be that much of the skew has a simpler explanation different people are interested in different things.the bus ticket theory also explains why people are less likely to do great work after they have children. here interest has to compete not just with external obstacles but with another interest and one that for most people is extremely powerful. its harder to find time for work after you have kids but thats the easy part. the real change is that you dont want to.but the most exciting implication of the bus ticket theory is that it suggests ways to encourage great work. if the recipe for genius is simply natural ability plus hard work all we can do is hope we have a lot of ability and work as hard as we can. but if interest is a critical ingredient in genius we may be able by cultivating interest to cultivate genius.for example for the very ambitious the bus ticket theory suggests that the way to do great work is to relax a little. instead of gritting your teeth and diligently pursuing what all your peers agree is the most promising line of research maybe you should try doing something just for fun. and if youre stuck that may be the vector along which to break out.ive always liked hammings famous doublebarrelled question what are the most important problems in your field and why arent you working on one of them its a great way to shake yourself up. but it may be overfitting a bit. it might be at least as useful to ask yourself if you could take a year off to work on something that probably wouldnt be important but would be really interesting what would it bethe bus ticket theory also suggests a way to avoid slowing down as you get older. perhaps the reason people have fewer new ideas as they get older is not simply that theyre losing their edge. it may also be because once you become established you can no longer mess about with irresponsible side projects the way you could when you were young and no one cared what you did.the solution to that is obvious remain irresponsible. it will be hard though because the apparently random projects you take up to stave off decline will read to outsiders as evidence of it. and you yourself wont know for sure that theyre wrong. but it will at least be more fun to work on what you want.it may even be that we can cultivate a habit of intellectual bus ticket collecting in kids. the usual plan in education is to start with a broad shallow focus then gradually become more specialized. but ive done the opposite with my kids. i know i can count on their school to handle the broad shallow part so i take them deep.when they get interested in something however random i encourage them to go preposterously bus ticket collectorly deep. i dont do this because of the bus ticket theory. i do it because i want them to feel the joy of learning and theyre never going to feel that about something im making them learn. it has to be something theyre interested in. im just following the path of least resistance depth is a byproduct. but if in trying to show them the joy of learning i also end up training them to go deep so much the better.will it have any effect i have no idea. but that uncertainty may be the most interesting point of all. there is so much more to learn about how to do great work. as old as human civilization feels its really still very young if we havent nailed something so basic. its exciting to think there are still discoveries to make about discovery. if thats the sort of thing youre interested in.notes1 there are other types of collecting that illustrate this point better than bus tickets but theyre also more popular. it seemed just as well to use an inferior example rather than offend more people by telling them their hobby doesnt matter.2 i worried a little about using the word disinterested since some people mistakenly believe it means not interested. but anyone who expects to be a genius will have to know the meaning of such a basic word so i figure they may as well start now.3 think how often genius must have been nipped in the bud by people being told or telling themselves to stop messing about and be responsible. ramanujans mother was a huge enabler. imagine if she hadnt been. imagine if his parents had made him go out and get a job instead of sitting around at home doing math.on the other hand anyone quoting the preceding paragraph to justify not getting a job is probably mistaken.4 1709 darwin is to time what the milanese leonardo is to space.5 an infinite capacity for taking pains is a paraphrase of what carlyle wrote. what he wrote in his history of frederick the great was ... it is the fruit of genius which means transcendent capacity of taking trouble first of all.... since the paraphrase seems the name of the idea at this point i kept it.carlyles history was published in 1858. in 1785 hrault de schelles quoted buffon as saying le gnie nest quune plus grande aptitude  la patience. genius is only a greater aptitude for patience.6 trollope was establishing the system of postal routes. he himself sensed the obsessiveness with which he pursued this goal.it is amusing to watch how a passion will grow upon a man. during those two years it was the ambition of my life to cover the country with rural lettercarriers.even newton occasionally sensed the degree of his obsessiveness. after computing pi to 15 digits he wrote in a letter to a friendi am ashamed to tell you to how many figures i carried these computations having no other business at the time.incidentally ramanujan was also a compulsive calculator. as kanigel writes in his excellent biographyone ramanujan scholar b. m. wilson later told how ramanujans research into number theory was often preceded by a table of numerical results carried usually to a length from which most of us would shrink.7 working to understand the natural world counts as creating rather than consuming.newton tripped over this distinction when he chose to work on theology. his beliefs did not allow him to see it but chasing down paradoxes in nature is fruitful in a way that chasing down paradoxes in sacred texts is not.8 how much of peoples propensity to become interested in a topic is inborn my experience so far suggests the answer is most of it. different kids get interested in different things and its hard to make a child interested in something they wouldnt otherwise be. not in a way that sticks. the most you can do on behalf of a topic is to make sure it gets a fair showing  to make it clear to them for example that theres more to math than the dull drills they do in school. after that its up to the child.

january 2023someone fed my essays into gpt to make something that could answer questions based on them then asked it where good ideas come from. the answer was ok but not what i would have said. this is what i would have said.the way to get new ideas is to notice anomalies what seems strange or missing or broken you can see anomalies in everyday life much of standup comedy is based on this but the best place to look for them is at the frontiers of knowledge.knowledge grows fractally. from a distance its edges look smooth but when you learn enough to get close to one youll notice its full of gaps. these gaps will seem obvious it will seem inexplicable that no one has tried x or wondered about y. in the best case exploring such gaps yields whole new fractal buds.

about a month after we started y combinator we came up with the phrase that became our motto make something people want. weve learned a lot since then but if i were choosing now thats still the one id pick.another thing we tell founders is not to worry too much about the business model at least at first. not because making money is unimportant but because its so much easier than building something great.a couple weeks ago i realized that if you put those two ideas together you get something surprising. make something people want. dont worry too much about making money. what youve got is a description of a charity.when you get an unexpected result like this it could either be a bug or a new discovery. either businesses arent supposed to be like charities and weve proven by reductio ad absurdum that one or both of the principles we began with is false. or we have a new idea.i suspect its the latter because as soon as this thought occurred to me a whole bunch of other things fell into place.examplesfor example craigslist. its not a charity but they run it like one. and theyre astoundingly successful. when you scan down the list of most popular web sites the number of employees at craigslist looks like a misprint. their revenues arent as high as they could be but most startups would be happy to trade places with them.in patrick obrians novels his captains always try to get upwind of their opponents. if youre upwind you decide when and if to engage the other ship. craigslist is effectively upwind of enormous revenues. theyd face some challenges if they wanted to make more but not the sort you face when youre tacking upwind trying to force a crappy product on ambivalent users by spending ten times as much on sales as on development. 1im not saying startups should aim to end up like craigslist. theyre a product of unusual circumstances. but theyre a good model for the early phases.google looked a lot like a charity in the beginning. they didnt have ads for over a year. at year 1 google was indistinguishable from a nonprofit. if a nonprofit or government organization had started a project to index the web google at year 1 is the limit of what theyd have produced.back when i was working on spam filters i thought it would be a good idea to have a webbased email service with good spam filtering. i wasnt thinking of it as a company. i just wanted to keep people from getting spammed. but as i thought more about this project i realized it would probably have to be a company. it would cost something to run and it would be a pain to fund with grants and donations.that was a surprising realization. companies often claim to be benevolent but it was surprising to realize there were purely benevolent projects that had to be embodied as companies to work.i didnt want to start another company so i didnt do it. but if someone had theyd probably be quite rich now. there was a window of about two years when spam was increasing rapidly but all the big email services had terrible filters. if someone had launched a new spamfree mail service users would have flocked to it.notice the pattern here from either direction we get to the same spot. if you start from successful startups you find they often behaved like nonprofits. and if you start from ideas for nonprofits you find theyd often make good startups.powerhow wide is this territory would all good nonprofits be good companies possibly not. what makes google so valuable is that their users have money. if you make people with money love you you can probably get some of it. but could you also base a successful startup on behaving like a nonprofit to people who dont have money could you for example grow a successful startup out of curing an unfashionable but deadly disease like malariaim not sure but i suspect that if you pushed this idea youd be surprised how far it would go. for example people who apply to y combinator dont generally have much money and yet we can profit by helping them because with our help they could make money. maybe the situation is similar with malaria. maybe an organization that helped lift its weight off a country could benefit from the resulting growth.im not proposing this is a serious idea. i dont know anything about malaria. but ive been kicking ideas around long enough to know when i come across a powerful one.one way to guess how far an idea extends is to ask yourself at what point youd bet against it. the thought of betting against benevolence is alarming in the same way as saying that something is technically impossible. youre just asking to be made a fool of because these are such powerful forces. 2for example initially i thought maybe this principle only applied to internet startups. obviously it worked for google but what about microsoft surely microsoft isnt benevolent but when i think back to the beginning they were. compared to ibm they were like robin hood. when ibm introduced the pc they thought they were going to make money selling hardware at high prices. but by gaining control of the pc standard microsoft opened up the market to any manufacturer. hardware prices plummeted and lots of people got to have computers who couldnt otherwise have afforded them. its the sort of thing youd expect google to do.microsoft isnt so benevolent now. now when one thinks of what microsoft does to users all the verbs that come to mind begin with f. 3 and yet it doesnt seem to pay. their stock price has been flat for years. back when they were robin hood their stock price rose like googles. could there be a connectionyou can see how there would be. when youre small you cant bully customers so you have to charm them. whereas when youre big you can maltreat them at will and you tend to because its easier than satisfying them. you grow big by being nice but you can stay big by being mean.you get away with it till the underlying conditions change and then all your victims escape. so dont be evil may be the most valuable thing paul buchheit made for google because it may turn out to be an elixir of corporate youth. im sure they find it constraining but think how valuable it will be if it saves them from lapsing into the fatal laziness that afflicted microsoft and ibm.the curious thing is this elixir is freely available to any other company. anyone can adopt dont be evil. the catch is that people will hold you to it. so i dont think youre going to see record labels or tobacco companies using this discovery.moraletheres a lot of external evidence that benevolence works. but how does it work one advantage of investing in a large number of startups is that you get a lot of data about how they work. from what weve seen being good seems to help startups in three ways it improves their morale it makes other people want to help them and above all it helps them be decisive.morale is tremendously important to a startupso important that morale alone is almost enough to determine success. startups are often described as emotional rollercoasters. one minute youre going to take over the world and the next youre doomed. the problem with feeling youre doomed is not just that it makes you unhappy but that it makes you stop working. so the downhills of the rollercoaster are more of a self fulfilling prophecy than the uphills. if feeling youre going to succeed makes you work harder that probably improves your chances of succeeding but if feeling youre going to fail makes you stop working that practically guarantees youll fail.heres where benevolence comes in. if you feel youre really helping people youll keep working even when it seems like your startup is doomed. most of us have some amount of natural benevolence. the mere fact that someone needs you makes you want to help them. so if you start the kind of startup where users come back each day youve basically built yourself a giant tamagotchi. youve made something you need to take care of.blogger is a famous example of a startup that went through really low lows and survived. at one point they ran out of money and everyone left. evan williams came in to work the next day and there was no one but him. what kept him going partly that users needed him. he was hosting thousands of peoples blogs. he couldnt just let the site die.there are many advantages of launching quickly but the most important may be that once you have users the tamagotchi effect kicks in. once you have users to take care of youre forced to figure out what will make them happy and thats actually very valuable information.the added confidence that comes from trying to help people can also help you with investors. one of the founders of chatterous told me recently that he and his cofounder had decided that this service was something the world needed so they were going to keep working on it no matter what even if they had to move back to canada and live in their parents basements.once they realized this they stopped caring so much what investors thought about them. they still met with them but they werent going to die if they didnt get their money. and you know what the investors got a lot more interested. they could sense that the chatterouses were going to do this startup with or without them.if youre really committed and your startup is cheap to run you become very hard to kill. and practically all startups even the most successful come close to death at some point. so if doing good for people gives you a sense of mission that makes you harder to kill that alone more than compensates for whatever you lose by not choosing a more selfish project.helpanother advantage of being good is that it makes other people want to help you. this too seems to be an inborn trait in humans.one of the startups weve funded octopart is currently locked in a classic battle of good versus evil. theyre a search site for industrial components. a lot of people need to search for components and before octopart there was no good way to do it. that it turned out was no coincidence.octopart built the right way to search for components. users like it and theyve been growing rapidly. and yet for most of octoparts life the biggest distributor digikey has been trying to force them take their prices off the site. octopart is sending them customers for free and yet digikey is trying to make that traffic stop. why because their current business model depends on overcharging people who have incomplete information about prices. they dont want search to work.the octoparts are the nicest guys in the world. they dropped out of the phd program in physics at berkeley to do this. they just wanted to fix a problem they encountered in their research. imagine how much time you could save the worlds engineers if they could do searches online. so when i hear that a big evil company is trying to stop them in order to keep search broken it makes me really want to help them. it makes me spend more time on the octoparts than i do with most of the other startups weve funded. it just made me spend several minutes telling you how great they are. why because theyre good guys and theyre trying to help the world.if youre benevolent people will rally around you investors customers other companies and potential employees. in the long term the most important may be the potential employees. i think everyone knows now that good hackers are much better than mediocre ones. if you can attract the best hackers to work for you as google has you have a big advantage. and the very best hackers tend to be idealistic. theyre not desperate for a job. they can work wherever they want. so most want to work on things that will make the world better.compassbut the most important advantage of being good is that it acts as a compass. one of the hardest parts of doing a startup is that you have so many choices. there are just two or three of you and a thousand things you could do. how do you decideheres the answer do whatevers best for your users. you can hold onto this like a rope in a hurricane and it will save you if anything can. follow it and it will take you through everything you need to do.its even the answer to questions that seem unrelated like how to convince investors to give you money. if youre a good salesman you could try to just talk them into it. but the more reliable route is to convince them through your users if you make something users love enough to tell their friends you grow exponentially and that will convince any investor.being good is a particularly useful strategy for making decisions in complex situations because its stateless. its like telling the truth. the trouble with lying is that you have to remember everything youve said in the past to make sure you dont contradict yourself. if you tell the truth you dont have to remember anything and thats a really useful property in domains where things happen fast.for example y combinator has now invested in 80 startups 57 of which are still alive. the rest have died or merged or been acquired. when youre trying to advise 57 startups it turns out you have to have a stateless algorithm. you cant have ulterior motives when you have 57 things going on at once because you cant remember them. so our rule is just to do whatevers best for the founders. not because were particularly benevolent but because its the only algorithm that works on that scale.when you write something telling people to be good you seem to be claiming to be good yourself. so i want to say explicitly that i am not a particularly good person. when i was a kid i was firmly in the camp of bad. the way adults used the word good it seemed to be synonymous with quiet so i grew up very suspicious of it.you know how there are some people whose names come up in conversation and everyone says hes such a great guy people never say that about me. the best i get is he means well. i am not claiming to be good. at best i speak good as a second language.so im not suggesting you be good in the usual sanctimonious way. im suggesting it because it works. it will work not just as a statement of values but as a guide to strategy and even a design spec for software. dont just not be evil. be good.notes1 fifty years ago it would have seemed shocking for a public company not to pay dividends. now many tech companies dont. the markets seem to have figured out how to value potential dividends. maybe that isnt the last step in this evolution. maybe markets will eventually get comfortable with potential earnings. vcs already are and at least some of them consistently make money.i realize this sounds like the stuff one used to hear about the new economy during the bubble. believe me i was not drinking that koolaid at the time. but im convinced there were some good ideas buried in bubble thinking. for example its ok to focus on growth instead of profitsbut only if the growth is genuine. you cant be buying users thats a pyramid scheme. but a company with rapid genuine growth is valuable and eventually markets learn how to value valuable things.2 the idea of starting a company with benevolent aims is currently undervalued because the kind of people who currently make that their explicit goal dont usually do a very good job.its one of the standard career paths of trustafarians to start some vaguely benevolent business. the problem with most of them is that they either have a bogus political agenda or are feebly executed. the trustafarians ancestors didnt get rich by preserving their traditional culture maybe people in bolivia dont want to either. and starting an organic farm though its at least straightforwardly benevolent doesnt help people on the scale that google does.most explicitly benevolent projects dont hold themselves sufficiently accountable. they act as if having good intentions were enough to guarantee good effects.3 users dislike their new operating system so much that theyre starting petitions to save the old one. and the old one was nothing special. the hackers within microsoft must know in their hearts that if the company really cared about users theyd just advise them to switch to osx.

when i was a kid id have said there wasnt. my father told me so. some people like some things and other people like other things and whos to say whos rightit seemed so obvious that there was no such thing as good taste that it was only through indirect evidence that i realized my father was wrong. and thats what im going to give you here a proof by reductio ad absurdum. if we start from the premise that theres no such thing as good taste we end up with conclusions that are obviously false and therefore the premise must be wrong.wed better start by saying what good taste is. theres a narrow sense in which it refers to aesthetic judgements and a broader one in which it refers to preferences of any kind. the strongest proof would be to show that taste exists in the narrowest sense so im going to talk about taste in art. you have better taste than me if the art you like is better than the art i like.if theres no such thing as good taste then theres no such thing as good art. because if there is such a thing as good art its easy to tell which of two people has better taste. show them a lot of works by artists theyve never seen before and ask them to choose the best and whoever chooses the better art has better taste.so if you want to discard the concept of good taste you also have to discard the concept of good art. and that means you have to discard the possibility of people being good at making it. which means theres no way for artists to be good at their jobs. and not just visual artists but anyone who is in any sense an artist. you cant have good actors or novelists or composers or dancers either. you can have popular novelists but not good ones.we dont realize how far wed have to go if we discarded the concept of good taste because we dont even debate the most obvious cases. but it doesnt just mean we cant say which of two famous painters is better. it means we cant say that any painter is better than a randomly chosen eight year old.that was how i realized my father was wrong. i started studying painting. and it was just like other kinds of work id done you could do it well or badly and if you tried hard you could get better at it. and it was obvious that leonardo and bellini were much better at it than me. that gap between us was not imaginary. they were so good. and if they could be good then art could be good and there was such a thing as good taste after all.now that ive explained how to show there is such a thing as good taste i should also explain why people think there isnt. there are two reasons. one is that theres always so much disagreement about taste. most peoples response to art is a tangle of unexamined impulses. is the artist famous is the subject attractive is this the sort of art theyre supposed to like is it hanging in a famous museum or reproduced in a big expensive book in practice most peoples response to art is dominated by such extraneous factors.and the people who do claim to have good taste are so often mistaken. the paintings admired by the socalled experts in one generation are often so different from those admired a few generations later. its easy to conclude theres nothing real there at all. its only when you isolate this force for example by trying to paint and comparing your work to bellinis that you can see that it does in fact exist.the other reason people doubt that art can be good is that there doesnt seem to be any room in the art for this goodness. the argument goes like this. imagine several people looking at a work of art and judging how good it is. if being good art really is a property of objects it should be in the object somehow. but it doesnt seem to be it seems to be something happening in the heads of each of the observers. and if they disagree how do you choose between themthe solution to this puzzle is to realize that the purpose of art is to work on its human audience and humans have a lot in common. and to the extent the things an object acts upon respond in the same way thats arguably what it means for the object to have the corresponding property. if everything a particle interacts with behaves as if the particle had a mass of m then it has a mass of m. so the distinction between objective and subjective is not binary but a matter of degree depending on how much the subjects have in common. particles interacting with one another are at one pole but people interacting with art are not all the way at the other their reactions arent random.because peoples responses to art arent random art can be designed to operate on people and be good or bad depending on how effectively it does so. much as a vaccine can be. if someone were talking about the ability of a vaccine to confer immunity it would seem very frivolous to object that conferring immunity wasnt really a property of vaccines because acquiring immunity is something that happens in the immune system of each individual person. sure peoples immune systems vary and a vaccine that worked on one might not work on another but that doesnt make it meaningless to talk about the effectiveness of a vaccine.the situation with art is messier of course. you cant measure effectiveness by simply taking a vote as you do with vaccines. you have to imagine the responses of subjects with a deep knowledge of art and enough clarity of mind to be able to ignore extraneous influences like the fame of the artist. and even then youd still see some disagreement. people do vary and judging art is hard especially recent art. there is definitely not a total order either of works or of peoples ability to judge them. but there is equally definitely a partial order of both. so while its not possible to have perfect taste it is possible to have good taste.

umair haque wrote recently that the reason there arent more googles is that most startups get bought before they can change the world.google despite serious interest from microsoft and yahoowhat must have seemed like lucrative interest at the timedidnt sell out. google might simply have been nothing but yahoos or msns search box.why isnt it because google had a deeply felt sense of purpose a conviction to change the world for the better.this has a nice sound to it but it isnt true. googles founders were willing to sell early on. they just wanted more than acquirers were willing to pay.it was the same with facebook. they would have sold but yahoo blew it by offering too little.tip for acquirers when a startup turns you down consider raising your offer because theres a good chance the outrageous price they want will later seem a bargain. 1from the evidence ive seen so far startups that turn down acquisition offers usually end up doing better. not always but usually theres a bigger offer coming or perhaps even an ipo.of course the reason startups do better when they turn down acquisition offers is not necessarily that all such offers undervalue startups. more likely the reason is that the kind of founders who have the balls to turn down a big offer also tend to be very successful. that spirit is exactly what you want in a startup.while im sure larry and sergey do want to change the world at least now the reason google survived to become a big independent company is the same reason facebook has so far remained independent acquirers underestimated them.corporate ma is a strange business in that respect. they consistently lose the best deals because turning down reasonable offers is the most reliable test you could invent for whether a startup will make it big.vcsso whats the real reason there arent more googles curiously enough its the same reason google and facebook have remained independent money guys undervalue the most innovative startups.the reason there arent more googles is not that investors encourage innovative startups to sell out but that they wont even fund them. ive learned a lot about vcs during the 3 years weve been doing y combinator because we often have to work quite closely with them. the most surprising thing ive learned is how conservative they are. vc firms present an image of boldly encouraging innovation. only a handful actually do and even they are more conservative in reality than youd guess from reading their sites.i used to think of vcs as piratical bold but unscrupulous. on closer acquaintance they turn out to be more like bureaucrats. theyre more upstanding than i used to think the good ones at least but less bold. maybe the vc industry has changed. maybe they used to be bolder. but i suspect its the startup world that has changed not them. the low cost of starting a startup means the average good bet is a riskier one but most existing vc firms still operate as if they were investing in hardware startups in 1985.howard aiken said dont worry about people stealing your ideas. if your ideas are any good youll have to ram them down peoples throats. i have a similar feeling when im trying to convince vcs to invest in startups y combinator has funded. theyre terrified of really novel ideas unless the founders are good enough salesmen to compensate.but its the bold ideas that generate the biggest returns. any really good new idea will seem bad to most people otherwise someone would already be doing it. and yet most vcs are driven by consensus not just within their firms but within the vc community. the biggest factor determining how a vc will feel about your startup is how other vcs feel about it. i doubt they realize it but this algorithm guarantees theyll miss all the very best ideas. the more people who have to like a new idea the more outliers you lose.whoever the next google is theyre probably being told right now by vcs to come back when they have more traction.why are vcs so conservative its probably a combination of factors. the large size of their investments makes them conservative. plus theyre investing other peoples money which makes them worry theyll get in trouble if they do something risky and it fails. plus most of them are money guys rather than technical guys so they dont understand what the startups theyre investing in do.whats nextthe exciting thing about market economies is that stupidity equals opportunity. and so it is in this case. there is a huge unexploited opportunity in startup investing. y combinator funds startups at the very beginning. vcs will fund them once theyre already starting to succeed. but between the two there is a substantial gap.there are companies that will give 20k to a startup that has nothing more than the founders and there are companies that will give 2 million to a startup thats already taking off but there arent enough investors who will give 200k to a startup that seems very promising but still has some things to figure out. this territory is occupied mostly by individual angel investorspeople like andy bechtolsheim who gave google 100k when they seemed promising but still had some things to figure out. i like angels but there just arent enough of them and investing is for most of them a part time job.and yet as it gets cheaper to start startups this sparsely occupied territory is becoming more and more valuable. nowadays a lot of startups dont want to raise multimillion dollar series a rounds. they dont need that much money and they dont want the hassles that come with it. the median startup coming out of y combinator wants to raise 250500k. when they go to vc firms they have to ask for more because they know vcs arent interested in such small deals.vcs are money managers. theyre looking for ways to put large sums to work. but the startup world is evolving away from their current model.startups have gotten cheaper. that means they want less money but also that there are more of them. so you can still get large returns on large amounts of money you just have to spread it more broadly.ive tried to explain this to vc firms. instead of making one 2 million investment make five 400k investments. would that mean sitting on too many boards dont sit on their boards. would that mean too much due diligence do less. if youre investing at a tenth the valuation you only have to be a tenth as sure.it seems obvious. but ive proposed to several vc firms that they set aside some money and designate one partner to make more smaller bets and they react as if id proposed the partners all get nose rings. its remarkable how wedded they are to their standard m.o.but there is a big opportunity here and one way or the other its going to get filled. either vcs will evolve down into this gap or more likely new investors will appear to fill it. that will be a good thing when it happens because these new investors will be compelled by the structure of the investments they make to be ten times bolder than present day vcs. and that will get us a lot more googles. at least as long as acquirers remain stupid.

if you collected lists of techniques for doing great work in a lot of different fields what would the intersection look like i decided to find out by making it.partly my goal was to create a guide that could be used by someone working in any field. but i was also curious about the shape of the intersection. and one thing this exercise shows is that it does have a definite shape its not just a point labelled work hard.the following recipe assumes youre very ambitious.the first step is to decide what to work on. the work you choose needs to have three qualities it has to be something you have a natural aptitude for that you have a deep interest in and that offers scope to do great work.in practice you dont have to worry much about the third criterion. ambitious people are if anything already too conservative about it. so all you need to do is find something you have an aptitude for and great interest in. 1that sounds straightforward but its often quite difficult. when youre young you dont know what youre good at or what different kinds of work are like. some kinds of work you end up doing may not even exist yet. so while some people know what they want to do at 14 most have to figure it out.the way to figure out what to work on is by working. if youre not sure what to work on guess. but pick something and get going. youll probably guess wrong some of the time but thats fine. its good to know about multiple things some of the biggest discoveries come from noticing connections between different fields.develop a habit of working on your own projects. dont let work mean something other people tell you to do. if you do manage to do great work one day it will probably be on a project of your own. it may be within some bigger project but youll be driving your part of it.what should your projects be whatever seems to you excitingly ambitious. as you grow older and your taste in projects evolves exciting and important will converge. at 7 it may seem excitingly ambitious to build huge things out of lego then at 14 to teach yourself calculus till at 21 youre starting to explore unanswered questions in physics. but always preserve excitingness.theres a kind of excited curiosity thats both the engine and the rudder of great work. it will not only drive you but if you let it have its way will also show you what to work on.what are you excessively curious about  curious to a degree that would bore most other people thats what youre looking for.once youve found something youre excessively interested in the next step is to learn enough about it to get you to one of the frontiers of knowledge. knowledge expands fractally and from a distance its edges look smooth but once you learn enough to get close to one they turn out to be full of gaps.the next step is to notice them. this takes some skill because your brain wants to ignore such gaps in order to make a simpler model of the world. many discoveries have come from asking questions about things that everyone else took for granted. 2if the answers seem strange so much the better. great work often has a tincture of strangeness. you see this from painting to math. it would be affected to try to manufacture it but if it appears embrace it.boldly chase outlier ideas even if other people arent interested in them  in fact especially if they arent. if youre excited about some possibility that everyone else ignores and you have enough expertise to say precisely what theyre all overlooking thats as good a bet as youll find. 3four steps choose a field learn enough to get to the frontier notice gaps explore promising ones. this is how practically everyone whos done great work has done it from painters to physicists.steps two and four will require hard work. it may not be possible to prove that you have to work hard to do great things but the empirical evidence is on the scale of the evidence for mortality. thats why its essential to work on something youre deeply interested in. interest will drive you to work harder than mere diligence ever could.the three most powerful motives are curiosity delight and the desire to do something impressive. sometimes they converge and that combination is the most powerful of all.the big prize is to discover a new fractal bud. you notice a crack in the surface of knowledge pry it open and theres a whole world inside.lets talk a little more about the complicated business of figuring out what to work on. the main reason its hard is that you cant tell what most kinds of work are like except by doing them. which means the four steps overlap you may have to work at something for years before you know how much you like it or how good you are at it. and in the meantime youre not doing and thus not learning about most other kinds of work. so in the worst case you choose late based on very incomplete information. 4the nature of ambition exacerbates this problem. ambition comes in two forms one that precedes interest in the subject and one that grows out of it. most people who do great work have a mix and the more you have of the former the harder it will be to decide what to do.the educational systems in most countries pretend its easy. they expect you to commit to a field long before you could know what its really like. and as a result an ambitious person on an optimal trajectory will often read to the system as an instance of breakage.it would be better if they at least admitted it  if they admitted that the system not only cant do much to help you figure out what to work on but is designed on the assumption that youll somehow magically guess as a teenager. they dont tell you but i will when it comes to figuring out what to work on youre on your own. some people get lucky and do guess correctly but the rest will find themselves scrambling diagonally across tracks laid down on the assumption that everyone does.what should you do if youre young and ambitious but dont know what to work on what you should not do is drift along passively assuming the problem will solve itself. you need to take action. but there is no systematic procedure you can follow. when you read biographies of people whove done great work its remarkable how much luck is involved. they discover what to work on as a result of a chance meeting or by reading a book they happen to pick up. so you need to make yourself a big target for luck and the way to do that is to be curious. try lots of things meet lots of people read lots of books ask lots of questions. 5when in doubt optimize for interestingness. fields change as you learn more about them. what mathematicians do for example is very different from what you do in high school math classes. so you need to give different types of work a chance to show you what theyre like. but a field should become increasingly interesting as you learn more about it. if it doesnt its probably not for you.dont worry if you find youre interested in different things than other people. the stranger your tastes in interestingness the better. strange tastes are often strong ones and a strong taste for work means youll be productive. and youre more likely to find new things if youre looking where few have looked before.one sign that youre suited for some kind of work is when you like even the parts that other people find tedious or frightening.but fields arent people you dont owe them any loyalty. if in the course of working on one thing you discover another thats more exciting dont be afraid to switch.if youre making something for people make sure its something they actually want. the best way to do this is to make something you yourself want. write the story you want to read build the tool you want to use. since your friends probably have similar interests this will also get you your initial audience.this should follow from the excitingness rule. obviously the most exciting story to write will be the one you want to read. the reason i mention this case explicitly is that so many people get it wrong. instead of making what they want they try to make what some imaginary more sophisticated audience wants. and once you go down that route youre lost. 6there are a lot of forces that will lead you astray when youre trying to figure out what to work on. pretentiousness fashion fear money politics other peoples wishes eminent frauds. but if you stick to what you find genuinely interesting youll be proof against all of them. if youre interested youre not astray.following your interests may sound like a rather passive strategy but in practice it usually means following them past all sorts of obstacles. you usually have to risk rejection and failure. so it does take a good deal of boldness.but while you need boldness you dont usually need much planning. in most cases the recipe for doing great work is simply work hard on excitingly ambitious projects and something good will come of it. instead of making a plan and then executing it you just try to preserve certain invariants.the trouble with planning is that it only works for achievements you can describe in advance. you can win a gold medal or get rich by deciding to as a child and then tenaciously pursuing that goal but you cant discover natural selection that way.i think for most people who want to do great work the right strategy is not to plan too much. at each stage do whatever seems most interesting and gives you the best options for the future. i call this approach staying upwind. this is how most people whove done great work seem to have done it.even when youve found something exciting to work on working on it is not always straightforward. there will be times when some new idea makes you leap out of bed in the morning and get straight to work. but there will also be plenty of times when things arent like that.you dont just put out your sail and get blown forward by inspiration. there are headwinds and currents and hidden shoals. so theres a technique to working just as there is to sailing.for example while you must work hard its possible to work too hard and if you do that youll find you get diminishing returns fatigue will make you stupid and eventually even damage your health. the point at which work yields diminishing returns depends on the type. some of the hardest types you might only be able to do for four or five hours a day.ideally those hours will be contiguous. to the extent you can try to arrange your life so you have big blocks of time to work in. youll shy away from hard tasks if you know you might be interrupted.it will probably be harder to start working than to keep working. youll often have to trick yourself to get over that initial threshold. dont worry about this its the nature of work not a flaw in your character. work has a sort of activation energy both per day and per project. and since this threshold is fake in the sense that its higher than the energy required to keep going its ok to tell yourself a lie of corresponding magnitude to get over it.its usually a mistake to lie to yourself if you want to do great work but this is one of the rare cases where it isnt. when im reluctant to start work in the morning i often trick myself by saying ill just read over what ive got so far. five minutes later ive found something that seems mistaken or incomplete and im off.similar techniques work for starting new projects. its ok to lie to yourself about how much work a project will entail for example. lots of great things began with someone saying how hard could it bethis is one case where the young have an advantage. theyre more optimistic and even though one of the sources of their optimism is ignorance in this case ignorance can sometimes beat knowledge.try to finish what you start though even if it turns out to be more work than you expected. finishing things is not just an exercise in tidiness or selfdiscipline. in many projects a lot of the best work happens in what was meant to be the final stage.another permissible lie is to exaggerate the importance of what youre working on at least in your own mind. if that helps you discover something new it may turn out not to have been a lie after all. 7since there are two senses of starting work  per day and per project  there are also two forms of procrastination. perproject procrastination is far the more dangerous. you put off starting that ambitious project from year to year because the time isnt quite right. when youre procrastinating in units of years you can get a lot not done. 8one reason perproject procrastination is so dangerous is that it usually camouflages itself as work. youre not just sitting around doing nothing youre working industriously on something else. so perproject procrastination doesnt set off the alarms that perday procrastination does. youre too busy to notice it.the way to beat it is to stop occasionally and ask yourself am i working on what i most want to work on when youre young its ok if the answer is sometimes no but this gets increasingly dangerous as you get older. 9great work usually entails spending what would seem to most people an unreasonable amount of time on a problem. you cant think of this time as a cost or it will seem too high. you have to find the work sufficiently engaging as its happening.there may be some jobs where you have to work diligently for years at things you hate before you get to the good part but this is not how great work happens. great work happens by focusing consistently on something youre genuinely interested in. when you pause to take stock youre surprised how far youve come.the reason were surprised is that we underestimate the cumulative effect of work. writing a page a day doesnt sound like much but if you do it every day youll write a book a year. thats the key consistency. people who do great things dont get a lot done every day. they get something done rather than nothing.if you do work that compounds youll get exponential growth. most people who do this do it unconsciously but its worth stopping to think about. learning for example is an instance of this phenomenon the more you learn about something the easier it is to learn more. growing an audience is another the more fans you have the more new fans theyll bring you.the trouble with exponential growth is that the curve feels flat in the beginning. it isnt its still a wonderful exponential curve. but we cant grasp that intuitively so we underrate exponential growth in its early stages.something that grows exponentially can become so valuable that its worth making an extraordinary effort to get it started. but since we underrate exponential growth early on this too is mostly done unconsciously people push through the initial unrewarding phase of learning something new because they know from experience that learning new things always takes an initial push or they grow their audience one fan at a time because they have nothing better to do. if people consciously realized they could invest in exponential growth many more would do it.work doesnt just happen when youre trying to. theres a kind of undirected thinking you do when walking or taking a shower or lying in bed that can be very powerful. by letting your mind wander a little youll often solve problems you were unable to solve by frontal attack.you have to be working hard in the normal way to benefit from this phenomenon though. you cant just walk around daydreaming. the daydreaming has to be interleaved with deliberate work that feeds it questions. 10everyone knows to avoid distractions at work but its also important to avoid them in the other half of the cycle. when you let your mind wander it wanders to whatever you care about most at that moment. so avoid the kind of distraction that pushes your work out of the top spot or youll waste this valuable type of thinking on the distraction instead. exception dont avoid love.consciously cultivate your taste in the work done in your field. until you know which is the best and what makes it so you dont know what youre aiming for.and that is what youre aiming for because if you dont try to be the best you wont even be good. this observation has been made by so many people in so many different fields that it might be worth thinking about why its true. it could be because ambition is a phenomenon where almost all the error is in one direction  where almost all the shells that miss the target miss by falling short. or it could be because ambition to be the best is a qualitatively different thing from ambition to be good. or maybe being good is simply too vague a standard. probably all three are true. 11fortunately theres a kind of economy of scale here. though it might seem like youd be taking on a heavy burden by trying to be the best in practice you often end up net ahead. its exciting and also strangely liberating. it simplifies things. in some ways its easier to try to be the best than to try merely to be good.one way to aim high is to try to make something that people will care about in a hundred years. not because their opinions matter more than your contemporaries but because something that still seems good in a hundred years is more likely to be genuinely good.dont try to work in a distinctive style. just try to do the best job you can you wont be able to help doing it in a distinctive way.style is doing things in a distinctive way without trying to. trying to is affectation.affectation is in effect to pretend that someone other than you is doing the work. you adopt an impressive but fake persona and while youre pleased with the impressiveness the fakeness is what shows in the work. 12the temptation to be someone else is greatest for the young. they often feel like nobodies. but you never need to worry about that problem because its selfsolving if you work on sufficiently ambitious projects. if you succeed at an ambitious project youre not a nobody youre the person who did it. so just do the work and your identity will take care of itself.avoid affectation is a useful rule so far as it goes but how would you express this idea positively how would you say what to be instead of what not to be the best answer is earnest. if youre earnest you avoid not just affectation but a whole set of similar vices.the core of being earnest is being intellectually honest. were taught as children to be honest as an unselfish virtue  as a kind of sacrifice. but in fact its a source of power too. to see new ideas you need an exceptionally sharp eye for the truth. youre trying to see more truth than others have seen so far. and how can you have a sharp eye for the truth if youre intellectually dishonestone way to avoid intellectual dishonesty is to maintain a slight positive pressure in the opposite direction. be aggressively willing to admit that youre mistaken. once youve admitted you were mistaken about something youre free. till then you have to carry it. 13another more subtle component of earnestness is informality. informality is much more important than its grammatically negative name implies. its not merely the absence of something. it means focusing on what matters instead of what doesnt.what formality and affectation have in common is that as well as doing the work youre trying to seem a certain way as youre doing it. but any energy that goes into how you seem comes out of being good. thats one reason nerds have an advantage in doing great work they expend little effort on seeming anything. in fact thats basically the definition of a nerd.nerds have a kind of innocent boldness thats exactly what you need in doing great work. its not learned its preserved from childhood. so hold onto it. be the one who puts things out there rather than the one who sits back and offers sophisticatedsounding criticisms of them. its easy to criticize is true in the most literal sense and the route to great work is never easy.there may be some jobs where its an advantage to be cynical and pessimistic but if you want to do great work its an advantage to be optimistic even though that means youll risk looking like a fool sometimes. theres an old tradition of doing the opposite. the old testament says its better to keep quiet lest you look like a fool. but thats advice for seeming smart. if you actually want to discover new things its better to take the risk of telling people your ideas.some people are naturally earnest and with others it takes a conscious effort. either kind of earnestness will suffice. but i doubt it would be possible to do great work without being earnest. its so hard to do even if you are. you dont have enough margin for error to accommodate the distortions introduced by being affected intellectually dishonest orthodox fashionable or cool. 14great work is consistent not only with who did it but with itself. its usually all of a piece. so if you face a decision in the middle of working on something ask which choice is more consistent.you may have to throw things away and redo them. you wont necessarily have to but you have to be willing to. and that can take some effort when theres something you need to redo status quo bias and laziness will combine to keep you in denial about it. to beat this ask if id already made the change would i want to revert to what i have nowhave the confidence to cut. dont keep something that doesnt fit just because youre proud of it or because it cost you a lot of effort.indeed in some kinds of work its good to strip whatever youre doing to its essence. the result will be more concentrated youll understand it better and you wont be able to lie to yourself about whether theres anything real there.mathematical elegance may sound like a mere metaphor drawn from the arts. thats what i thought when i first heard the term elegant applied to a proof. but now i suspect its conceptually prior  that the main ingredient in artistic elegance is mathematical elegance. at any rate its a useful standard well beyond math.elegance can be a longterm bet though. laborious solutions will often have more prestige in the short term. they cost a lot of effort and theyre hard to understand both of which impress people at least temporarily.whereas some of the very best work will seem like it took comparatively little effort because it was in a sense already there. it didnt have to be built just seen. its a very good sign when its hard to say whether youre creating something or discovering it.when youre doing work that could be seen as either creation or discovery err on the side of discovery. try thinking of yourself as a mere conduit through which the ideas take their natural shape.strangely enough one exception is the problem of choosing a problem to work on. this is usually seen as search but in the best case its more like creating something. in the best case you create the field in the process of exploring it.similarly if youre trying to build a powerful tool make it gratuitously unrestrictive. a powerful tool almost by definition will be used in ways you didnt expect so err on the side of eliminating restrictions even if you dont know what the benefit will be.great work will often be toollike in the sense of being something others build on. so its a good sign if youre creating ideas that others could use or exposing questions that others could answer. the best ideas have implications in many different areas.if you express your ideas in the most general form theyll be truer than you intended.true by itself is not enough of course. great ideas have to be true and new. and it takes a certain amount of ability to see new ideas even once youve learned enough to get to one of the frontiers of knowledge.in english we give this ability names like originality creativity and imagination. and it seems reasonable to give it a separate name because it does seem to some extent a separate skill. its possible to have a great deal of ability in other respects  to have a great deal of whats often called technical ability  and yet not have much of this.ive never liked the term creative process. it seems misleading. originality isnt a process but a habit of mind. original thinkers throw off new ideas about whatever they focus on like an angle grinder throwing off sparks. they cant help it.if the thing theyre focused on is something they dont understand very well these new ideas might not be good. one of the most original thinkers i know decided to focus on dating after he got divorced. he knew roughly as much about dating as the average 15 year old and the results were spectacularly colorful. but to see originality separated from expertise like that made its nature all the more clear.i dont know if its possible to cultivate originality but there are definitely ways to make the most of however much you have. for example youre much more likely to have original ideas when youre working on something. original ideas dont come from trying to have original ideas. they come from trying to build or understand something slightly too difficult. 15talking or writing about the things youre interested in is a good way to generate new ideas. when you try to put ideas into words a missing idea creates a sort of vacuum that draws it out of you. indeed theres a kind of thinking that can only be done by writing.changing your context can help. if you visit a new place youll often find you have new ideas there. the journey itself often dislodges them. but you may not have to go far to get this benefit. sometimes its enough just to go for a walk. 16it also helps to travel in topic space. youll have more new ideas if you explore lots of different topics partly because it gives the angle grinder more surface area to work on and partly because analogies are an especially fruitful source of new ideas.dont divide your attention evenly between many topics though or youll spread yourself too thin. you want to distribute it according to something more like a power law. 17 be professionally curious about a few topics and idly curious about many more.curiosity and originality are closely related. curiosity feeds originality by giving it new things to work on. but the relationship is closer than that. curiosity is itself a kind of originality its roughly to questions what originality is to answers. and since questions at their best are a big component of answers curiosity at its best is a creative force.having new ideas is a strange game because it usually consists of seeing things that were right under your nose. once youve seen a new idea it tends to seem obvious. why did no one think of this beforewhen an idea seems simultaneously novel and obvious its probably a good one.seeing something obvious sounds easy. and yet empirically having new ideas is hard. whats the source of this apparent contradiction its that seeing the new idea usually requires you to change the way you look at the world. we see the world through models that both help and constrain us. when you fix a broken model new ideas become obvious. but noticing and fixing a broken model is hard. thats how new ideas can be both obvious and yet hard to discover theyre easy to see after you do something hard.one way to discover broken models is to be stricter than other people. broken models of the world leave a trail of clues where they bash against reality. most people dont want to see these clues. it would be an understatement to say that theyre attached to their current model its what they think in so theyll tend to ignore the trail of clues left by its breakage however conspicuous it may seem in retrospect.to find new ideas you have to seize on signs of breakage instead of looking away. thats what einstein did. he was able to see the wild implications of maxwells equations not so much because he was looking for new ideas as because he was stricter.the other thing you need is a willingness to break rules. paradoxical as it sounds if you want to fix your model of the world it helps to be the sort of person whos comfortable breaking rules. from the point of view of the old model which everyone including you initially shares the new model usually breaks at least implicit rules.few understand the degree of rulebreaking required because new ideas seem much more conservative once they succeed. they seem perfectly reasonable once youre using the new model of the world they brought with them. but they didnt at the time it took the greater part of a century for the heliocentric model to be generally accepted even among astronomers because it felt so wrong.indeed if you think about it a good new idea has to seem bad to most people or someone would have already explored it. so what youre looking for is ideas that seem crazy but the right kind of crazy. how do you recognize these you cant with certainty. often ideas that seem bad are bad. but ideas that are the right kind of crazy tend to be exciting theyre rich in implications whereas ideas that are merely bad tend to be depressing.there are two ways to be comfortable breaking rules to enjoy breaking them and to be indifferent to them. i call these two cases being aggressively and passively independentminded.the aggressively independentminded are the naughty ones. rules dont merely fail to stop them breaking rules gives them additional energy. for this sort of person delight at the sheer audacity of a project sometimes supplies enough activation energy to get it started.the other way to break rules is not to care about them or perhaps even to know they exist. this is why novices and outsiders often make new discoveries their ignorance of a fields assumptions acts as a source of temporary passive independentmindedness. aspies also seem to have a kind of immunity to conventional beliefs. several i know say that this helps them to have new ideas.strictness plus rulebreaking sounds like a strange combination. in popular culture theyre opposed. but popular culture has a broken model in this respect. it implicitly assumes that issues are trivial ones and in trivial matters strictness and rulebreaking are opposed. but in questions that really matter only rulebreakers can be truly strict.an overlooked idea often doesnt lose till the semifinals. you do see it subconsciously but then another part of your subconscious shoots it down because it would be too weird too risky too much work too controversial. this suggests an exciting possibility if you could turn off such filters you could see more new ideas.one way to do that is to ask what would be good ideas for someone else to explore. then your subconscious wont shoot them down to protect you.you could also discover overlooked ideas by working in the other direction by starting from whats obscuring them. every cherished but mistaken principle is surrounded by a dead zone of valuable ideas that are unexplored because they contradict it.religions are collections of cherished but mistaken principles. so anything that can be described either literally or metaphorically as a religion will have valuable unexplored ideas in its shadow. copernicus and darwin both made discoveries of this type. 18what are people in your field religious about in the sense of being too attached to some principle that might not be as selfevident as they think what becomes possible if you discard itpeople show much more originality in solving problems than in deciding which problems to solve. even the smartest can be surprisingly conservative when deciding what to work on. people whod never dream of being fashionable in any other way get sucked into working on fashionable problems.one reason people are more conservative when choosing problems than solutions is that problems are bigger bets. a problem could occupy you for years while exploring a solution might only take days. but even so i think most people are too conservative. theyre not merely responding to risk but to fashion as well. unfashionable problems are undervalued.one of the most interesting kinds of unfashionable problem is the problem that people think has been fully explored but hasnt. great work often takes something that already exists and shows its latent potential. durer and watt both did this. so if youre interested in a field that others think is tapped out dont let their skepticism deter you. people are often wrong about this.working on an unfashionable problem can be very pleasing. theres no hype or hurry. opportunists and critics are both occupied elsewhere. the existing work often has an oldschool solidity. and theres a satisfying sense of economy in cultivating ideas that would otherwise be wasted.but the most common type of overlooked problem is not explicitly unfashionable in the sense of being out of fashion. it just doesnt seem to matter as much as it actually does. how do you find these by being selfindulgent  by letting your curiosity have its way and tuning out at least temporarily the little voice in your head that says you should only be working on important problems.you do need to work on important problems but almost everyone is too conservative about what counts as one. and if theres an important but overlooked problem in your neighborhood its probably already on your subconscious radar screen. so try asking yourself if you were going to take a break from serious work to work on something just because it would be really interesting what would you do the answer is probably more important than it seems.originality in choosing problems seems to matter even more than originality in solving them. thats what distinguishes the people who discover whole new fields. so what might seem to be merely the initial step  deciding what to work on  is in a sense the key to the whole game.few grasp this. one of the biggest misconceptions about new ideas is about the ratio of question to answer in their composition. people think big ideas are answers but often the real insight was in the question.part of the reason we underrate questions is the way theyre used in schools. in schools they tend to exist only briefly before being answered like unstable particles. but a really good question can be much more than that. a really good question is a partial discovery. how do new species arise is the force that makes objects fall to earth the same as the one that keeps planets in their orbits by even asking such questions you were already in excitingly novel territory.unanswered questions can be uncomfortable things to carry around with you. but the more youre carrying the greater the chance of noticing a solution  or perhaps even more excitingly noticing that two unanswered questions are the same.sometimes you carry a question for a long time. great work often comes from returning to a question you first noticed years before  in your childhood even  and couldnt stop thinking about. people talk a lot about the importance of keeping your youthful dreams alive but its just as important to keep your youthful questions alive. 19this is one of the places where actual expertise differs most from the popular picture of it. in the popular picture experts are certain. but actually the more puzzled you are the better so long as a the things youre puzzled about matter and b no one else understands them either.think about whats happening at the moment just before a new idea is discovered. often someone with sufficient expertise is puzzled about something. which means that originality consists partly of puzzlement  of confusion you have to be comfortable enough with the world being full of puzzles that youre willing to see them but not so comfortable that you dont want to solve them. 20its a great thing to be rich in unanswered questions. and this is one of those situations where the rich get richer because the best way to acquire new questions is to try answering existing ones. questions dont just lead to answers but also to more questions.the best questions grow in the answering. you notice a thread protruding from the current paradigm and try pulling on it and it just gets longer and longer. so dont require a question to be obviously big before you try answering it. you can rarely predict that. its hard enough even to notice the thread let alone to predict how much will unravel if you pull on it.its better to be promiscuously curious  to pull a little bit on a lot of threads and see what happens. big things start small. the initial versions of big things were often just experiments or side projects or talks which then grew into something bigger. so start lots of small things.being prolific is underrated. the more different things you try the greater the chance of discovering something new. understand though that trying lots of things will mean trying lots of things that dont work. you cant have a lot of good ideas without also having a lot of bad ones. 21though it sounds more responsible to begin by studying everything thats been done before youll learn faster and have more fun by trying stuff. and youll understand previous work better when you do look at it. so err on the side of starting. which is easier when starting means starting small those two ideas fit together like two puzzle pieces.how do you get from starting small to doing something great by making successive versions. great things are almost always made in successive versions. you start with something small and evolve it and the final version is both cleverer and more ambitious than anything you could have planned.its particularly useful to make successive versions when youre making something for people  to get an initial version in front of them quickly and then evolve it based on their response.begin by trying the simplest thing that could possibly work. surprisingly often it does. if it doesnt this will at least get you started.dont try to cram too much new stuff into any one version. there are names for doing this with the first version taking too long to ship and the second the second system effect but these are both merely instances of a more general principle.an early version of a new project will sometimes be dismissed as a toy. its a good sign when people do this. that means it has everything a new idea needs except scale and that tends to follow. 22the alternative to starting with something small and evolving it is to plan in advance what youre going to do. and planning does usually seem the more responsible choice. it sounds more organized to say were going to do x and then y and then z than were going to try x and see what happens. and it is more organized it just doesnt work as well.planning per se isnt good. its sometimes necessary but its a necessary evil  a response to unforgiving conditions. its something you have to do because youre working with inflexible media or because you need to coordinate the efforts of a lot of people. if you keep projects small and use flexible media you dont have to plan as much and your designs can evolve instead.take as much risk as you can afford. in an efficient market risk is proportionate to reward so dont look for certainty but for a bet with high expected value. if youre not failing occasionally youre probably being too conservative.though conservatism is usually associated with the old its the young who tend to make this mistake. inexperience makes them fear risk but its when youre young that you can afford the most.even a project that fails can be valuable. in the process of working on it youll have crossed territory few others have seen and encountered questions few others have asked. and theres probably no better source of questions than the ones you encounter in trying to do something slightly too hard.use the advantages of youth when you have them and the advantages of age once you have those. the advantages of youth are energy time optimism and freedom. the advantages of age are knowledge efficiency money and power. with effort you can acquire some of the latter when young and keep some of the former when old.the old also have the advantage of knowing which advantages they have. the young often have them without realizing it. the biggest is probably time. the young have no idea how rich they are in time. the best way to turn this time to advantage is to use it in slightly frivolous ways to learn about something you dont need to know about just out of curiosity or to try building something just because it would be cool or to become freakishly good at something.that slightly is an important qualification. spend time lavishly when youre young but dont simply waste it. theres a big difference between doing something you worry might be a waste of time and doing something you know for sure will be. the former is at least a bet and possibly a better one than you think. 23the most subtle advantage of youth or more precisely of inexperience is that youre seeing everything with fresh eyes. when your brain embraces an idea for the first time sometimes the two dont fit together perfectly. usually the problem is with your brain but occasionally its with the idea. a piece of it sticks out awkwardly and jabs you when you think about it. people who are used to the idea have learned to ignore it but you have the opportunity not to. 24so when youre learning about something for the first time pay attention to things that seem wrong or missing. youll be tempted to ignore them since theres a 99 chance the problem is with you. and you may have to set aside your misgivings temporarily to keep progressing. but dont forget about them. when youve gotten further into the subject come back and check if theyre still there. if theyre still viable in the light of your present knowledge they probably represent an undiscovered idea.one of the most valuable kinds of knowledge you get from experience is to know what you dont have to worry about. the young know all the things that could matter but not their relative importance. so they worry equally about everything when they should worry much more about a few things and hardly at all about the rest.but what you dont know is only half the problem with inexperience. the other half is what you do know that aint so. you arrive at adulthood with your head full of nonsense  bad habits youve acquired and false things youve been taught  and you wont be able to do great work till you clear away at least the nonsense in the way of whatever type of work you want to do.much of the nonsense left in your head is left there by schools. were so used to schools that we unconsciously treat going to school as identical with learning but in fact schools have all sorts of strange qualities that warp our ideas about learning and thinking.for example schools induce passivity. since you were a small child there was an authority at the front of the class telling all of you what you had to learn and then measuring whether you did. but neither classes nor tests are intrinsic to learning theyre just artifacts of the way schools are usually designed.the sooner you overcome this passivity the better. if youre still in school try thinking of your education as your project and your teachers as working for you rather than vice versa. that may seem a stretch but its not merely some weird thought experiment. its the truth economically and in the best case its the truth intellectually as well. the best teachers dont want to be your bosses. theyd prefer it if you pushed ahead using them as a source of advice rather than being pulled by them through the material.schools also give you a misleading impression of what work is like. in school they tell you what the problems are and theyre almost always soluble using no more than youve been taught so far. in real life you have to figure out what the problems are and you often dont know if theyre soluble at all.but perhaps the worst thing schools do to you is train you to win by hacking the test. you cant do great work by doing that. you cant trick god. so stop looking for that kind of shortcut. the way to beat the system is to focus on problems and solutions that others have overlooked not to skimp on the work itself.dont think of yourself as dependent on some gatekeeper giving you a big break. even if this were true the best way to get it would be to focus on doing good work rather than chasing influential people.and dont take rejection by committees to heart. the qualities that impress admissions officers and prize committees are quite different from those required to do great work. the decisions of selection committees are only meaningful to the extent that theyre part of a feedback loop and very few are.people new to a field will often copy existing work. theres nothing inherently bad about that. theres no better way to learn how something works than by trying to reproduce it. nor does copying necessarily make your work unoriginal. originality is the presence of new ideas not the absence of old ones.theres a good way to copy and a bad way. if youre going to copy something do it openly instead of furtively or worse still unconsciously. this is whats meant by the famously misattributed phrase great artists steal. the really dangerous kind of copying the kind that gives copying a bad name is the kind thats done without realizing it because youre nothing more than a train running on tracks laid down by someone else. but at the other extreme copying can be a sign of superiority rather than subordination. 25in many fields its almost inevitable that your early work will be in some sense based on other peoples. projects rarely arise in a vacuum. theyre usually a reaction to previous work. when youre first starting out you dont have any previous work if youre going to react to something it has to be someone elses. once youre established you can react to your own. but while the former gets called derivative and the latter doesnt structurally the two cases are more similar than they seem.oddly enough the very novelty of the most novel ideas sometimes makes them seem at first to be more derivative than they are. new discoveries often have to be conceived initially as variations of existing things even by their discoverers because there isnt yet the conceptual vocabulary to express them.there are definitely some dangers to copying though. one is that youll tend to copy old things  things that were in their day at the frontier of knowledge but no longer are.and when you do copy something dont copy every feature of it. some will make you ridiculous if you do. dont copy the manner of an eminent 50 year old professor if youre 18 for example or the idiom of a renaissance poem hundreds of years later.some of the features of things you admire are flaws they succeeded despite. indeed the features that are easiest to imitate are the most likely to be the flaws.this is particularly true for behavior. some talented people are jerks and this sometimes makes it seem to the inexperienced that being a jerk is part of being talented. it isnt being talented is merely how they get away with it.one of the most powerful kinds of copying is to copy something from one field into another. history is so full of chance discoveries of this type that its probably worth giving chance a hand by deliberately learning about other kinds of work. you can take ideas from quite distant fields if you let them be metaphors.negative examples can be as inspiring as positive ones. in fact you can sometimes learn more from things done badly than from things done well sometimes it only becomes clear whats needed when its missing.if a lot of the best people in your field are collected in one place its usually a good idea to visit for a while. it will increase your ambition and also by showing you that these people are human increase your selfconfidence. 26if youre earnest youll probably get a warmer welcome than you might expect. most people who are very good at something are happy to talk about it with anyone whos genuinely interested. if theyre really good at their work then they probably have a hobbyists interest in it and hobbyists always want to talk about their hobbies.it may take some effort to find the people who are really good though. doing great work has such prestige that in some places particularly universities theres a polite fiction that everyone is engaged in it. and that is far from true. people within universities cant say so openly but the quality of the work being done in different departments varies immensely. some departments have people doing great work others have in the past others never have.seek out the best colleagues. there are a lot of projects that cant be done alone and even if youre working on one that can be its good to have other people to encourage you and to bounce ideas off.colleagues dont just affect your work though they also affect you. so work with people you want to become like because you will.quality is more important than quantity in colleagues. its better to have one or two great ones than a building full of pretty good ones. in fact its not merely better but necessary judging from history the degree to which great work happens in clusters suggests that ones colleagues often make the difference between doing great work and not.how do you know when you have sufficiently good colleagues in my experience when you do you know. which means if youre unsure you probably dont. but it may be possible to give a more concrete answer than that. heres an attempt sufficiently good colleagues offer surprising insights. they can see and do things that you cant. so if you have a handful of colleagues good enough to keep you on your toes in this sense youre probably over the threshold.most of us can benefit from collaborating with colleagues but some projects require people on a larger scale and starting one of those is not for everyone. if you want to run a project like that youll have to become a manager and managing well takes aptitude and interest like any other kind of work. if you dont have them there is no middle path you must either force yourself to learn management as a second language or avoid such projects. 27husband your morale. its the basis of everything when youre working on ambitious projects. you have to nurture and protect it like a living organism.morale starts with your view of life. youre more likely to do great work if youre an optimist and more likely to if you think of yourself as lucky than if you think of yourself as a victim.indeed work can to some extent protect you from your problems. if you choose work thats pure its very difficulties will serve as a refuge from the difficulties of everyday life. if this is escapism its a very productive form of it and one that has been used by some of the greatest minds in history.morale compounds via work high morale helps you do good work which increases your morale and helps you do even better work. but this cycle also operates in the other direction if youre not doing good work that can demoralize you and make it even harder to. since it matters so much for this cycle to be running in the right direction it can be a good idea to switch to easier work when youre stuck just so you start to get something done.one of the biggest mistakes ambitious people make is to allow setbacks to destroy their morale all at once like a balloon bursting. you can inoculate yourself against this by explicitly considering setbacks a part of your process. solving hard problems always involves some backtracking.doing great work is a depthfirst search whose root node is the desire to. so if at first you dont succeed try try again isnt quite right. it should be if at first you dont succeed either try again or backtrack and then try again.never give up is also not quite right. obviously there are times when its the right choice to eject. a more precise version would be never let setbacks panic you into backtracking more than you need to. corollary never abandon the root node.its not necessarily a bad sign if work is a struggle any more than its a bad sign to be out of breath while running. it depends how fast youre running. so learn to distinguish good pain from bad. good pain is a sign of effort bad pain is a sign of damage.an audience is a critical component of morale. if youre a scholar your audience may be your peers in the arts it may be an audience in the traditional sense. either way it doesnt need to be big. the value of an audience doesnt grow anything like linearly with its size. which is bad news if youre famous but good news if youre just starting out because it means a small but dedicated audience can be enough to sustain you. if a handful of people genuinely love what youre doing thats enough.to the extent you can avoid letting intermediaries come between you and your audience. in some types of work this is inevitable but its so liberating to escape it that you might be better off switching to an adjacent type if that will let you go direct. 28the people you spend time with will also have a big effect on your morale. youll find there are some who increase your energy and others who decrease it and the effect someone has is not always what youd expect. seek out the people who increase your energy and avoid those who decrease it. though of course if theres someone you need to take care of that takes precedence.dont marry someone who doesnt understand that you need to work or sees your work as competition for your attention. if youre ambitious you need to work its almost like a medical condition so someone who wont let you work either doesnt understand you or does and doesnt care.ultimately morale is physical. you think with your body so its important to take care of it. that means exercising regularly eating and sleeping well and avoiding the more dangerous kinds of drugs. running and walking are particularly good forms of exercise because theyre good for thinking. 29people who do great work are not necessarily happier than everyone else but theyre happier than theyd be if they didnt. in fact if youre smart and ambitious its dangerous not to be productive. people who are smart and ambitious but dont achieve much tend to become bitter.its ok to want to impress other people but choose the right people. the opinion of people you respect is signal. fame which is the opinion of a much larger group you might or might not respect just adds noise.the prestige of a type of work is at best a trailing indicator and sometimes completely mistaken. if you do anything well enough youll make it prestigious. so the question to ask about a type of work is not how much prestige it has but how well it could be done.competition can be an effective motivator but dont let it choose the problem for you dont let yourself get drawn into chasing something just because others are. in fact dont let competitors make you do anything much more specific than work harder.curiosity is the best guide. your curiosity never lies and it knows more than you do about whats worth paying attention to.notice how often that word has come up. if you asked an oracle the secret to doing great work and the oracle replied with a single word my bet would be on curiosity.that doesnt translate directly to advice. its not enough just to be curious and you cant command curiosity anyway. but you can nurture it and let it drive you.curiosity is the key to all four steps in doing great work it will choose the field for you get you to the frontier cause you to notice the gaps in it and drive you to explore them. the whole process is a kind of dance with curiosity.believe it or not i tried to make this essay as short as i could. but its length at least means it acts as a filter. if you made it this far you must be interested in doing great work. and if so youre already further along than you might realize because the set of people willing to want to is small.the factors in doing great work are factors in the literal mathematical sense and they are ability interest effort and luck. luck by definition you cant do anything about so we can ignore that. and we can assume effort if you do in fact want to do great work. so the problem boils down to ability and interest. can you find a kind of work where your ability and interest will combine to yield an explosion of new ideashere there are grounds for optimism. there are so many different ways to do great work and even more that are still undiscovered. out of all those different types of work the one youre most suited for is probably a pretty close match. probably a comically close match. its just a question of finding it and how far into it your ability and interest can take you. and you can only answer that by trying.many more people could try to do great work than do. what holds them back is a combination of modesty and fear. it seems presumptuous to try to be newton or shakespeare. it also seems hard surely if you tried something like that youd fail. presumably the calculation is rarely explicit. few people consciously decide not to try to do great work. but thats whats going on subconsciously they shy away from the question.so im going to pull a sneaky trick on you. do you want to do great work or not now you have to decide consciously. sorry about that. i wouldnt have done it to a general audience. but we already know youre interested.dont worry about being presumptuous. you dont have to tell anyone. and if its too hard and you fail so what lots of people have worse problems than that. in fact youll be lucky if its the worst problem you have.yes youll have to work hard. but again lots of people have to work hard. and if youre working on something you find very interesting which you necessarily will if youre on the right path the work will probably feel less burdensome than a lot of your peers.the discoveries are out there waiting to be made. why not by younotes1 i dont think you could give a precise definition of what counts as great work. doing great work means doing something important so well that you expand peoples ideas of whats possible. but theres no threshold for importance. its a matter of degree and often hard to judge at the time anyway. so id rather people focused on developing their interests rather than worrying about whether theyre important or not. just try to do something amazing and leave it to future generations to say if you succeeded.2 a lot of standup comedy is based on noticing anomalies in everyday life. did you ever notice... new ideas come from doing this about nontrivial things. which may help explain why peoples reaction to a new idea is often the first half of laughing ha3 that second qualifier is critical. if youre excited about something most authorities discount but you cant give a more precise explanation than they dont get it then youre starting to drift into the territory of cranks.4 finding something to work on is not simply a matter of finding a match between the current version of you and a list of known problems. youll often have to coevolve with the problem. thats why it can sometimes be so hard to figure out what to work on. the search space is huge. its the cartesian product of all possible types of work both known and yet to be discovered and all possible future versions of you.theres no way you could search this whole space so you have to rely on heuristics to generate promising paths through it and hope the best matches will be clustered. which they will not always be different types of work have been collected together as much by accidents of history as by the intrinsic similarities between them.5 there are many reasons curious people are more likely to do great work but one of the more subtle is that by casting a wide net theyre more likely to find the right thing to work on in the first place.6 it can also be dangerous to make things for an audience you feel is less sophisticated than you if that causes you to talk down to them. you can make a lot of money doing that if you do it in a sufficiently cynical way but its not the route to great work. not that anyone using this m.o. would care.7 this idea i learned from hardys a mathematicians apology which i recommend to anyone ambitious to do great work in any field.8 just as we overestimate what we can do in a day and underestimate what we can do over several years we overestimate the damage done by procrastinating for a day and underestimate the damage done by procrastinating for several years.9 you cant usually get paid for doing exactly what you want especially early on. there are two options get paid for doing work close to what you want and hope to push it closer or get paid for doing something else entirely and do your own projects on the side. both can work but both have drawbacks in the first approach your work is compromised by default and in the second you have to fight to get time to do it.10 if you set your life up right it will deliver the focusrelax cycle automatically. the perfect setup is an office you work in and that you walk to and from.11 there may be some very unworldly people who do great work without consciously trying to. if you want to expand this rule to cover that case it becomes dont try to be anything except the best.12 this gets more complicated in work like acting where the goal is to adopt a fake persona. but even here its possible to be affected. perhaps the rule in such fields should be to avoid unintentional affectation.13 its safe to have beliefs that you treat as unquestionable if and only if theyre also unfalsifiable. for example its safe to have the principle that everyone should be treated equally under the law because a sentence with a should in it isnt really a statement about the world and is therefore hard to disprove. and if theres no evidence that could disprove one of your principles there cant be any facts youd need to ignore in order to preserve it.14 affectation is easier to cure than intellectual dishonesty. affectation is often a shortcoming of the young that burns off in time while intellectual dishonesty is more of a character flaw.15 obviously you dont have to be working at the exact moment you have the idea but youll probably have been working fairly recently.16 some say psychoactive drugs have a similar effect. im skeptical but also almost totally ignorant of their effects.17 for example you might give the nth most important topic m1mn of your attention for some m  1. you couldnt allocate your attention so precisely of course but this at least gives an idea of a reasonable distribution.18 the principles defining a religion have to be mistaken. otherwise anyone might adopt them and there would be nothing to distinguish the adherents of the religion from everyone else.19 it might be a good exercise to try writing down a list of questions you wondered about in your youth. you might find youre now in a position to do something about some of them.20 the connection between originality and uncertainty causes a strange phenomenon because the conventionalminded are more certain than the independentminded this tends to give them the upper hand in disputes even though theyre generally stupider.the best lack all conviction while the worstare full of passionate intensity.21 derived from linus paulings if you want to have good ideas you must have many ideas.22 attacking a project as a toy is similar to attacking a statement as inappropriate. it means that no more substantial criticism can be made to stick.23 one way to tell whether youre wasting time is to ask if youre producing or consuming. writing computer games is less likely to be a waste of time than playing them and playing games where you create something is less likely to be a waste of time than playing games where you dont.24 another related advantage is that if you havent said anything publicly yet you wont be biased toward evidence that supports your earlier conclusions. with sufficient integrity you could achieve eternal youth in this respect but few manage to. for most people having previously published opinions has an effect similar to ideology just in quantity 1.25 in the early 1630s daniel mytens made a painting of henrietta maria handing a laurel wreath to charles i. van dyck then painted his own version to show how much better he was.26 im being deliberately vague about what a place is. as of this writing being in the same physical place has advantages that are hard to duplicate but that could change.27 this is false when the work the other people have to do is very constrained as with setihome or bitcoin. it may be possible to expand the area in which its false by defining similarly restricted protocols with more freedom of action in the nodes.28 corollary building something that enables people to go around intermediaries and engage directly with their audience is probably a good idea.29 it may be helpful always to walk or run the same route because that frees attention for thinking. it feels that way to me and there is some historical evidence for it.

hacker news was two years old last week. initially it was supposed to be a side projectan application to sharpen arc on and a place for current and future y combinator founders to exchange news. its grown bigger and taken up more time than i expected but i dont regret that because ive learned so much from working on it.growthwhen we launched in february 2007 weekday traffic was around 1600 daily uniques. its since grown to around 22000. this growth rate is a bit higher than id like. id like the site to grow since a site that isnt growing at least slowly is probably dead. but i wouldnt want it to grow as large as digg or redditmainly because that would dilute the character of the site but also because i dont want to spend all my time dealing with scaling.i already have problems enough with that. remember the original motivation for hn was to test a new programming language and moreover one thats focused on experimenting with language design not performance. every time the site gets slow i fortify myself by recalling mcilroy and bentleys famous quotethe key to performance is elegance not battalions of special cases.and look for the bottleneck i can remove with least code. so far ive been able to keep up in the sense that performance has remained consistently mediocre despite 14x growth. i dont know what ill do next but ill probably think of something.this is my attitude to the site generally. hacker news is an experiment and an experiment in a very young field. sites of this type are only a few years old. internet conversation generally is only a few decades old. so weve probably only discovered a fraction of what we eventually will.thats why im so optimistic about hn. when a technology is this young the existing solutions are usually terrible which means it must be possible to do much better which means many problems that seem insoluble arent. including i hope the problem that has afflicted so many previous communities being ruined by growth.dilutionusers have worried about that since the site was a few months old. so far these alarms have been false but they may not always be. dilution is a hard problem. but probably soluble it doesnt mean much that open conversations have always been destroyed by growth when always equals 20 instances.but its important to remember were trying to solve a new problem because that means were going to have to try new things most of which probably wont work. a couple weeks ago i tried displaying the names of users with the highest average comment scores in orange. 1 that was a mistake. suddenly a culture that had been more or less united was divided into haves and havenots. i didnt realize how united the culture had been till i saw it divided. it was painful to watch. 2so orange usernames wont be back. sorry about that. but there will be other equally brokenseeming ideas in the future and the ones that turn out to work will probably seem just as broken as those that dont.probably the most important thing ive learned about dilution is that its measured more in behavior than users. its bad behavior you want to keep out more than bad people. user behavior turns out to be surprisingly malleable. if people are expected to behave well they tend to and vice versa.though of course forbidding bad behavior does tend to keep away bad people because they feel uncomfortably constrained in a place where they have to behave well. but this way of keeping them out is gentler and probably also more effective than overt barriers.its pretty clear now that the broken windows theory applies to community sites as well. the theory is that minor forms of bad behavior encourage worse ones that a neighborhood with lots of graffiti and broken windows becomes one where robberies occur. i was living in new york when giuliani introduced the reforms that made the broken windows theory famous and the transformation was miraculous. and i was a reddit user when the opposite happened there and the transformation was equally dramatic.im not criticizing steve and alexis. what happened to reddit didnt happen out of neglect. from the start they had a policy of censoring nothing except spam. plus reddit had different goals from hacker news. reddit was a startup not a side project its goal was to grow as fast as possible. combine rapid growth and zero censorship and the result is a free for all. but i dont think theyd do much differently if they were doing it again. measured by traffic reddit is much more successful than hacker news.but what happened to reddit wont inevitably happen to hn. there are several local maxima. there can be places that are free for alls and places that are more thoughtful just as there are in the real world and people will behave differently depending on which theyre in just as they do in the real world.ive observed this in the wild. ive seen people crossposting on reddit and hacker news who actually took the trouble to write two versions a flame for reddit and a more subdued version for hn.submissionsthere are two major types of problems a site like hacker news needs to avoid bad stories and bad comments. so far the danger of bad stories seems smaller. the stories on the frontpage now are still roughly the ones that would have been there when hn started.i once thought id have to weight votes to keep crap off the frontpage but i havent had to yet. i wouldnt have predicted the frontpage would hold up so well and im not sure why it has. perhaps only the more thoughtful users care enough to submit and upvote links so the marginal cost of one random new user approaches zero. or perhaps the frontpage protects itself by advertising what type of submission is expected.the most dangerous thing for the frontpage is stuff thats too easy to upvote. if someone proves a new theorem it takes some work by the reader to decide whether or not to upvote it. an amusing cartoon takes less. a rant with a rallying cry as the title takes zero because people vote it up without even reading it.hence what i call the fluff principle on a uservoted news site the links that are easiest to judge will take over unless you take specific measures to prevent it.hacker news has two kinds of protections against fluff. the most common types of fluff links are banned as offtopic. pictures of kittens political diatribes and so on are explicitly banned. this keeps out most fluff but not all of it. some links are both fluff in the sense of being very short and also on topic.theres no single solution to that. if a link is just an empty rant editors will sometimes kill it even if its on topic in the sense of being about hacking because its not on topic by the real standard which is to engage ones intellectual curiosity. if the posts on a site are characteristically of this type i sometimes ban it which means new stuff at that url is autokilled. if a post has a linkbait title editors sometimes rephrase it to be more matteroffact. this is especially necessary with links whose titles are rallying cries because otherwise they become implicit vote up if you believe suchandsuch posts which are the most extreme form of fluff.the techniques for dealing with links have to evolve because the links do. the existence of aggregators has already affected what they aggregate. writers now deliberately write things to draw traffic from aggregatorssometimes even specific ones. no the irony of this statement is not lost on me. then there are the more sinister mutations like linkjackingposting a paraphrase of someone elses article and submitting that instead of the original. these can get a lot of upvotes because a lot of whats good in an article often survives indeed the closer the paraphrase is to plagiarism the more survives. 3i think its important that a site that kills submissions provide a way for users to see what got killed if they want to. that keeps editors honest and just as importantly makes users confident theyd know if the editors stopped being honest. hn users can do this by flipping a switch called showdead in their profile. 4commentsbad comments seem to be a harder problem than bad submissions. while the quality of links on the frontpage of hn hasnt changed much the quality of the median comment may have decreased somewhat.there are two main kinds of badness in comments meanness and stupidity. there is a lot of overlap between the twomean comments are disproportionately likely also to be dumbbut the strategies for dealing with them are different. meanness is easier to control. you can have rules saying one shouldnt be mean and if you enforce them it seems possible to keep a lid on meanness.keeping a lid on stupidity is harder perhaps because stupidity is not so easily distinguishable. mean people are more likely to know theyre being mean than stupid people are to know theyre being stupid.the most dangerous form of stupid comment is not the long but mistaken argument but the dumb joke. long but mistaken arguments are actually quite rare. there is a strong correlation between comment quality and length if you wanted to compare the quality of comments on community sites average length would be a good predictor. probably the cause is human nature rather than anything specific to comment threads. probably its simply that stupidity more often takes the form of having few ideas than wrong ones.whatever the cause stupid comments tend to be short. and since its hard to write a short comment thats distinguished for the amount of information it conveys people try to distinguish them instead by being funny. the most tempting format for stupid comments is the supposedly witty putdown probably because putdowns are the easiest form of humor. 5 so one advantage of forbidding meanness is that it also cuts down on these.bad comments are like kudzu they take over rapidly. comments have much more effect on new comments than submissions have on new submissions. if someone submits a lame article the other submissions dont all become lame. but if someone posts a stupid comment on a thread that sets the tone for the region around it. people reply to dumb jokes with dumb jokes.maybe the solution is to add a delay before people can respond to a comment and make the length of the delay inversely proportional to some prediction of its quality. then dumb threads would grow slower. 6peoplei notice most of the techniques ive described are conservative theyre aimed at preserving the character of the site rather than enhancing it. i dont think thats a bias of mine. its due to the shape of the problem. hacker news had the good fortune to start out good so in this case its literally a matter of preservation. but i think this principle would also apply to sites with different origins.the good things in a community site come from people more than technology its mainly in the prevention of bad things that technology comes into play. technology certainly can enhance discussion. nested comments do for example. but id rather use a site with primitive features and smart nice users than a more advanced one whose users were idiots or trolls.so the most important thing a community site can do is attract the kind of people it wants. a site trying to be as big as possible wants to attract everyone. but a site aiming at a particular subset of users has to attract just thoseand just as importantly repel everyone else. ive made a conscious effort to do this on hn. the graphic design is as plain as possible and the site rules discourage dramatic link titles. the goal is that the only thing to interest someone arriving at hn for the first time should be the ideas expressed there.the downside of tuning a site to attract certain people is that to those people it can be too attractive. im all too aware how addictive hacker news can be. for me as for many users its a kind of virtual town square. when i want to take a break from working i walk into the square just as i might into harvard square or university ave in the physical world. 7 but an online square is more dangerous than a physical one. if i spent half the day loitering on university ave id notice. i have to walk a mile to get there and sitting in a cafe feels different from working. but visiting an online forum takes just a click and feels superficially very much like working. you may be wasting your time but youre not idle. someone is wrong on the internet and youre fixing the problem.hacker news is definitely useful. ive learned a lot from things ive read on hn. ive written several essays that began as comments there. so i wouldnt want the site to go away. but i would like to be sure its not a net drag on productivity. what a disaster that would be to attract thousands of smart people to a site that caused them to waste lots of time. i wish i could be 100 sure thats not a description of hn.i feel like the addictiveness of games and social applications is still a mostly unsolved problem. the situation now is like it was with crack in the 1980s weve invented terribly addictive new things and we havent yet evolved ways to protect ourselves from them. we will eventually and thats one of the problems i hope to focus on next.notes1 i tried ranking users by both average and median comment score and average with the high score thrown out seemed the more accurate predictor of high quality. median may be the more accurate predictor of low quality though.2 another thing i learned from this experiment is that if youre going to distinguish between people you better be sure you do it right. this is one problem where rapid prototyping doesnt work.indeed thats the intellectually honest argument for not discriminating between various types of people. the reason not to do it is not that everyones the same but that its bad to do wrong and hard to do right.3 when i catch egregiously linkjacked posts i replace the url with that of whatever they copied. sites that habitually linkjack get banned.4 digg is notorious for its lack of transparency. the root of the problem is not that the guys running digg are especially sneaky but that they use the wrong algorithm for generating their frontpage. instead of bubbling up from the bottom as they get more votes as on reddit stories start at the top and get pushed down by new arrivals.the reason for the difference is that digg is derived from slashdot while reddit is derived from deliciouspopular. digg is slashdot with voting instead of editors and reddit is deliciouspopular with voting instead of bookmarking. you can still see fossils of their origins in their graphic design.diggs algorithm is very vulnerable to gaming because any story that makes it onto the frontpage is the new top story. which in turn forces digg to respond with extreme countermeasures. a lot of startups have some kind of secret about the subterfuges they had to resort to in the early days and i suspect diggs is the extent to which the top stories were de facto chosen by human editors.5 the dialog on beavis and butthead was composed largely of these and when i read comments on really bad sites i can hear them in their voices.6 i suspect most of the techniques for discouraging stupid comments have yet to be discovered. xkcd implemented a particularly clever one in its irc channel dont allow the same thing twice. once someone has said fail no one can ever say it again. this would penalize short comments especially because they have less room to avoid collisions in.another promising idea is the stupid filter which is just like a probabilistic spam filter but trained on corpora of stupid and nonstupid comments instead.you may not have to kill bad comments to solve the problem. comments at the bottom of a long thread are rarely seen so it may be enough to incorporate a prediction of quality in the comment sorting algorithm.7 what makes most suburbs so demoralizing is that theres no center to walk to.

the biggest component in most investors opinion of you is the opinion of other investors. which is of course a recipe for exponential growth. when one investor wants to invest in you that makes other investors want to which makes others want to and so on.sometimes inexperienced founders mistakenly conclude that manipulating these forces is the essence of fundraising. they hear stories about stampedes to invest in successful startups and think its therefore the mark of a successful startup to have this happen. but actually the two are not that highly correlated. lots of startups that cause stampedes end up flaming out in extreme cases partly as a result of the stampede and lots of very successful startups were only moderately popular with investors the first time they raised money.so the point of this essay is not to explain how to create a stampede but merely to explain the forces that generate them. these forces are always at work to some degree in fundraising and they can cause surprising situations. if you understand them you can at least avoid being surprised.one reason investors like you more when other investors like you is that you actually become a better investment. raising money decreases the risk of failure. indeed although investors hate it you are for this reason justified in raising your valuation for later investors. the investors who invested when you had no money were taking more risk and are entitled to higher returns. plus a company that has raised money is literally more valuable. after you raise the first million dollars the company is at least a million dollars more valuable because its the same company as before plus it has a million dollars in the bank. 1beware though because later investors so hate to have the price raised on them that they resist even this selfevident reasoning. only raise the price on an investor youre comfortable with losing because some will angrily refuse. 2the second reason investors like you more when youve had some success at fundraising is that it makes you more confident and an investors opinion of you is the foundation of their opinion of your company. founders are often surprised how quickly investors seem to know when they start to succeed at raising money. and while there are in fact lots of ways for such information to spread among investors the main vector is probably the founders themselves. though theyre often clueless about technology most investors are pretty good at reading people. when fundraising is going well investors are quick to sense it in your increased confidence. this is one case where the average founders inability to remain pokerfaced works to your advantage.but frankly the most important reason investors like you more when youve started to raise money is that theyre bad at judging startups. judging startups is hard even for the best investors. the mediocre ones might as well be flipping coins. so when mediocre investors see that lots of other people want to invest in you they assume there must be a reason. this leads to the phenomenon known in the valley as the hot deal where you have more interest from investors than you can handle.the best investors arent influenced much by the opinion of other investors. it would only dilute their own judgment to average it together with other peoples. but they are indirectly influenced in the practical sense that interest from other investors imposes a deadline. this is the fourth way in which offers beget offers. if you start to get far along the track toward an offer with one firm it will sometimes provoke other firms even good ones to make up their minds lest they lose the deal.unless youre a wizard at negotiation and if youre not sure youre not be very careful about exaggerating this to push a good investor to decide. founders try this sort of thing all the time and investors are very sensitive to it. if anything oversensitive. but youre safe so long as youre telling the truth. if youre getting far along with investor b but youd rather raise money from investor a you can tell investor a that this is happening. theres no manipulation in that. youre genuinely in a bind because you really would rather raise money from a but you cant safely reject an offer from b when its still uncertain what a will decide.do not however tell a who b is. vcs will sometimes ask which other vcs youre talking to but you should never tell them. angels you can sometimes tell about other angels because angels cooperate more with one another. but if vcs ask just point out that they wouldnt want you telling other firms about your conversations and you feel obliged to do the same for any firm you talk to. if they push you point out that youre inexperienced at fundraising  which is always a safe card to play  and you feel you have to be extra cautious. 3while few startups will experience a stampede of interest almost all will at least initially experience the other side of this phenomenon where the herd remains clumped together at a distance. the fact that investors are so much influenced by other investors opinions means you always start out in something of a hole. so dont be demoralized by how hard it is to get the first commitment because much of the difficulty comes from this external force. the second will be easier.

one of the most surprising things ive witnessed in my lifetime is the rebirth of the concept of heresy.in his excellent biography of newton richard westfall writes about the moment when he was elected a fellow of trinity collegesupported comfortably newton was free to devote himself wholly to whatever he chose. to remain on he had only to avoid the three unforgivable sins crime heresy and marriage. 1the first time i read that in the 1990s it sounded amusingly medieval. how strange to have to avoid committing heresy. but when i reread it 20 years later it sounded like a description of contemporary employment.there are an everincreasing number of opinions you can be fired for. those doing the firing dont use the word heresy to describe them but structurally theyre equivalent. structurally there are two distinctive things about heresy 1 that it takes priority over the question of truth or falsity and 2 that it outweighs everything else the speaker has done.for example when someone calls a statement xist theyre also implicitly saying that this is the end of the discussion. they do not having said this go on to consider whether the statement is true or not. using such labels is the conversational equivalent of signalling an exception. thats one of the reasons theyre used to end a discussion.if you find yourself talking to someone who uses these labels a lot it might be worthwhile to ask them explicitly if they believe any babies are being thrown out with the bathwater. can a statement be xist for whatever value of x and also true if the answer is yes then theyre admitting to banning the truth. thats obvious enough that id guess most would answer no. but if they answer no its easy to show that theyre mistaken and that in practice such labels are applied to statements regardless of their truth or falsity.the clearest evidence of this is that whether a statement is considered xist often depends on who said it. truth doesnt work that way. the same statement cant be true when one person says it but xist and therefore false when another person does. 2the other distinctive thing about heresies compared to ordinary opinions is that the public expression of them outweighs everything else the speaker has done. in ordinary matters like knowledge of history or taste in music youre judged by the average of your opinions. a heresy is qualitatively different. its like dropping a chunk of uranium onto the scale.back in the day and still in some places the punishment for heresy was death. you could have led a life of exemplary goodness but if you publicly doubted say the divinity of christ you were going to burn. nowadays in civilized countries heretics only get fired in the metaphorical sense by losing their jobs. but the structure of the situation is the same the heresy outweighs everything else. you could have spent the last ten years saving childrens lives but if you express certain opinions youre automatically fired.its much the same as if you committed a crime. no matter how virtuously youve lived if you commit a crime you must still suffer the penalty of the law. having lived a previously blameless life might mitigate the punishment but it doesnt affect whether youre guilty or not.a heresy is an opinion whose expression is treated like a crime  one that makes some people feel not merely that youre mistaken but that you should be punished. indeed their desire to see you punished is often stronger than it would be if youd committed an actual crime. there are many on the far left who believe strongly in the reintegration of felons as i do myself and yet seem to feel that anyone guilty of certain heresies should never work again.there are always some heresies  some opinions youd be punished for expressing. but there are a lot more now than there were a few decades ago and even those who are happy about this would have to agree that its so.why why has this antiquatedsounding religious concept come back in a secular form and why nowyou need two ingredients for a wave of intolerance intolerant people and an ideology to guide them. the intolerant people are always there. they exist in every sufficiently large society. thats why waves of intolerance can arise so suddenly all they need is something to set them off.ive already written an essay describing the aggressively conventionalminded. the short version is that people can be classified in two dimensions according to 1 how independent or conventionalminded they are and 2 how aggressive they are about it. the aggressively conventionalminded are the enforcers of orthodoxy.normally theyre only locally visible. theyre the grumpy censorious people in a group  the ones who are always first to complain when something violates the current rules of propriety. but occasionally like a vector field whose elements become aligned a large number of aggressively conventionalminded people unite behind some ideology all at once. then they become much more of a problem because a mob dynamic takes over where the enthusiasm of each participant is increased by the enthusiasm of the others.the most notorious 20th century case may have been the cultural revolution. though initiated by mao to undermine his rivals the cultural revolution was otherwise mostly a grassroots phenomenon. mao said in essence there are heretics among us. seek them out and punish them. and thats all the aggressively conventionalminded ever need to hear. they went at it with the delight of dogs chasing squirrels.to unite the conventionalminded an ideology must have many of the features of a religion. in particular it must have strict and arbitrary rules that adherents can demonstrate their purity by obeying and its adherents must believe that anyone who obeys these rules is ipso facto morally superior to anyone who doesnt. 3in the late 1980s a new ideology of this type appeared in us universities. it had a very strong component of moral purity and the aggressively conventionalminded seized upon it with their usual eagerness  all the more because the relaxation of social norms in the preceding decades meant there had been less and less to forbid. the resulting wave of intolerance has been eerily similar in form to the cultural revolution though fortunately much smaller in magnitude. 4ive deliberately avoided mentioning any specific heresies here. partly because one of the universal tactics of heretic hunters now as in the past is to accuse those who disapprove of the way in which they suppress ideas of being heretics themselves. indeed this tactic is so consistent that you could use it as a way of detecting witch hunts in any era.and thats the second reason ive avoided mentioning any specific heresies. i want this essay to work in the future not just now. and unfortunately it probably will. the aggressively conventionalminded will always be among us looking for things to forbid. all they need is an ideology to tell them what. and its unlikely the current one will be the last.there are aggressively conventionalminded people on both the right and the left. the reason the current wave of intolerance comes from the left is simply because the new unifying ideology happened to come from the left. the next one might come from the right. imagine what that would be like.fortunately in western countries the suppression of heresies is nothing like as bad as it used to be. though the window of opinions you can express publicly has narrowed in the last decade its still much wider than it was a few hundred years ago. the problem is the derivative. up till about 1985 the window had been growing ever wider. anyone looking into the future in 1985 would have expected freedom of expression to continue to increase. instead it has decreased. 5the situation is similar to whats happened with infectious diseases like measles. anyone looking into the future in 2010 would have expected the number of measles cases in the us to continue to decrease. instead thanks to antivaxxers it has increased. the absolute number is still not that high. the problem is the derivative. 6in both cases its hard to know how much to worry. is it really dangerous to society as a whole if a handful of extremists refuse to get their kids vaccinated or shout down speakers at universities the point to start worrying is presumably when their efforts start to spill over into everyone elses lives. and in both cases that does seem to be happening.so its probably worth spending some amount of effort on pushing back to keep open the window of free expression. my hope is that this essay will help form social antibodies not just against current efforts to suppress ideas but against the concept of heresy in general. thats the real prize. how do you disable the concept of heresy since the enlightenment western societies have discovered many techniques for doing that but there are surely more to be discovered.overall im optimistic. though the trend in freedom of expression has been bad over the last decade its been good over the longer term. and there are signs that the current wave of intolerance is peaking. independentminded people i talk to seem more confident than they did a few years ago. on the other side even some of the leaders are starting to wonder if things have gone too far. and popular culture among the young has already moved on. all we have to do is keep pushing back and the wave collapses. and then well be net ahead because as well as having defeated this wave well also have developed new tactics for resisting the next one.notes1 or more accurately biographies of newton since westfall wrote two a long version called never at rest and a shorter one called the life of isaac newton. both are great. the short version moves faster but the long one is full of interesting and often very funny details. this passage is the same in both.2 another more subtle but equally damning bit of evidence is that claims of xism are never qualified. you never hear anyone say that a statement is probably xist or almost certainly yist. if claims of xism were actually claims about truth youd expect to see probably in front of xist as often as you see it in front of fallacious.3 the rules must be strict but they need not be demanding. so the most effective type of rules are those about superficial matters like doctrinal minutiae or the precise words adherents must use. such rules can be made extremely complicated and yet dont repel potential converts by requiring significant sacrifice.the superficial demands of orthodoxy make it an inexpensive substitute for virtue. and that in turn is one of the reasons orthodoxy is so attractive to bad people. you could be a horrible person and yet as long as youre orthodox youre better than everyone who isnt.4 arguably there were two. the first had died down somewhat by 2000 but was followed by a second in the 2010s probably caused by social media.5 fortunately most of those trying to suppress ideas today still respect enlightenment principles enough to pay lip service to them. they know theyre not supposed to ban ideas per se so they have to recast the ideas as causing harm which sounds like something that can be banned. the more extreme try to claim speech itself is violence or even that silence is. but strange as it may sound such gymnastics are a good sign. well know were really in trouble when they stop bothering to invent pretenses for banning ideas  when like the medieval church they say damn right were banning ideas and in fact heres a list of them.6 people only have the luxury of ignoring the medical consensus about vaccines because vaccines have worked so well. if we didnt have any vaccines at all the mortality rate would be so high that most current antivaxxers would be begging for them. and the situation with freedom of expression is similar. its only because they live in a world created by the enlightenment that kids from the suburbs can play at banning ideas.

there are some topics i save up because theyll be so much fun to write about. this is one of them a list of my heroes.im not claiming this is a list of the n most admirable people. who could make such a list even if they wanted toeinstein isnt on the list for example even though he probably deserves to be on any shortlist of admirable people. i once asked a physicist friend if einstein was really as smart as his fame implies and she said that yes he was. so why isnt he on the list because i had to ask. this is a list of people whove influenced me not people who would have if i understood their work.my test was to think of someone and ask is this person my hero it often returned surprising answers. for example it returned false for montaigne who was arguably the inventor of the essay. why when i thought about what it meant to call someone a hero it meant id decide what to do by asking what theyd do in the same situation. thats a stricter standard than admiration.after i made the list i looked to see if there was a pattern and there was a very clear one. everyone on the list had two qualities they cared almost excessively about their work and they were absolutely honest. by honest i dont mean trustworthy so much as that they never pander they never say or do something because thats what the audience wants. they are all fundamentally subversive for this reason though they conceal it to varying degrees.jack lamberti grew up in pittsburgh in the 1970s. unless you were there its hard to imagine how that town felt about the steelers. locally all the news was bad. the steel industry was dying. but the steelers were the best team in football  and moreover in a way that seemed to reflect the personality of the city. they didnt do anything fancy. they just got the job done.other players were more famous terry bradshaw franco harris lynn swann. but they played offense and you always get more attention for that. it seemed to me as a twelve year old football expert that the best of them all was jack lambert. and what made him so good was that he was utterly relentless. he didnt just care about playing well he cared almost too much. he seemed to regard it as a personal insult when someone from the other team had possession of the ball on his side of the line of scrimmage.the suburbs of pittsburgh in the 1970s were a pretty dull place. school was boring. all the adults around were bored with their jobs working for big companies. everything that came to us through the mass media was a blandly uniform and b produced elsewhere. jack lambert was the exception. he was like nothing else id seen.kenneth clarkkenneth clark is the best nonfiction writer i know of on any subject. most people who write about art history dont really like art you can tell from a thousand little signs. but clark did and not just intellectually but the way one anticipates a delicious dinner.what really makes him stand out though is the quality of his ideas. his style is deceptively casual but there is more in his books than in a library of art monographs. reading the nude is like a ride in a ferrari. just as youre getting settled youre slammed back in your seat by the acceleration. before you can adjust youre thrown sideways as the car screeches into the first turn. his brain throws off ideas almost too fast to grasp them. finally at the end of the chapter you come to a halt with your eyes wide and a big smile on your face.kenneth clark was a star in his day thanks to the documentary series civilisation. and if you read only one book about art history civilisation is the one id recommend. its much better than the drab sears catalogs of art that undergraduates are forced to buy for art history 101.larry mihalkoa lot of people have a great teacher at some point in their childhood. larry mihalko was mine. when i look back its like theres a line drawn between third and fourth grade. after mr. mihalko everything was different.why first of all he was intellectually curious. i had a few other teachers who were smart but i wouldnt describe them as intellectually curious. in retrospect he was out of place as an elementary school teacher and i think he knew it. that must have been hard for him but it was wonderful for us his students. his class was a constant adventure. i used to like going to school every day.the other thing that made him different was that he liked us. kids are good at telling that. the other teachers were at best benevolently indifferent. but mr. mihalko seemed like he actually wanted to be our friend. on the last day of fourth grade he got out one of the heavy school record players and played james taylors youve got a friend to us. just call out my name and you know wherever i am ill come running. he died at 59 of lung cancer. ive never cried like i cried at his funeral.leonardoone of the things ive learned about making things that i didnt realize when i was a kid is that much of the best stuff isnt made for audiences but for oneself. you see paintings and drawings in museums and imagine they were made for you to look at. actually a lot of the best ones were made as a way of exploring the world not as a way to please other people. the best of these explorations are sometimes more pleasing than stuff made explicitly to please.leonardo did a lot of things. one of his most admirable qualities was that he did so many different things that were admirable. what people know of him now is his paintings and his more flamboyant inventions like flying machines. that makes him seem like some kind of dreamer who sketched artists conceptions of rocket ships on the side. in fact he made a large number of far more practical technical discoveries. he was as good an engineer as a painter.his most impressive work to me is his drawings. theyre clearly made more as a way of studying the world than producing something beautiful. and yet they can hold their own with any work of art ever made. no one else before or since was that good when no one was looking.robert morrisrobert morris has a very unusual quality hes never wrong. it might seem this would require you to be omniscient but actually its surprisingly easy. dont say anything unless youre fairly sure of it. if youre not omniscient you just dont end up saying much.more precisely the trick is to pay careful attention to how you qualify what you say. by using this trick robert has as far as i know managed to be mistaken only once and that was when he was an undergrad. when the mac came out he said that little desktop computers would never be suitable for real hacking.its wrong to call it a trick in his case though. if it were a conscious trick he would have slipped in a moment of excitement. with robert this quality is wiredin. he has an almost superhuman integrity. hes not just generally correct but also correct about how correct he is.youd think it would be such a great thing never to be wrong that everyone would do this. it doesnt seem like that much extra work to pay as much attention to the error on an idea as to the idea itself. and yet practically no one does. i know how hard it is because since meeting robert ive tried to do in software what he seems to do in hardware.p. g. wodehousepeople are finally starting to admit that wodehouse was a great writer. if you want to be thought a great novelist in your own time you have to sound intellectual. if what you write is popular or entertaining or funny youre ipso facto suspect. that makes wodehouse doubly impressive because it meant that to write as he wanted to he had to commit to being despised in his own lifetime.evelyn waugh called him a great writer but to most people at the time that would have read as a chivalrous or deliberately perverse gesture. at the time any random autobiographical novel by a recent college grad could count on more respectful treatment from the literary establishment.wodehouse may have begun with simple atoms but the way he composed them into molecules was near faultless. his rhythm in particular. it makes me selfconscious to write about it. i can think of only two other writers who came near him for style evelyn waugh and nancy mitford. those three used the english language like they owned it.but wodehouse has something neither of them did. hes at ease. evelyn waugh and nancy mitford cared what other people thought of them he wanted to seem aristocratic she was afraid she wasnt smart enough. but wodehouse didnt give a damn what anyone thought of him. he wrote exactly what he wanted.alexander caldercalders on this list because he makes me happy. can his work stand up to leonardos probably not. there might not be anything from the 20th century that can. but what was good about modernism calder had and had in a way that he made seem effortless.what was good about modernism was its freshness. art became stuffy in the nineteenth century. the paintings that were popular at the time were mostly the art equivalent of mcmansionsbig pretentious and fake. modernism meant starting over making things with the same earnest motives that children might. the artists who benefited most from this were the ones who had preserved a childs confidence like klee and calder.klee was impressive because he could work in so many different styles. but between the two i like calder better because his work seemed happier. ultimately the point of art is to engage the viewer. its hard to predict what will often something that seems interesting at first will bore you after a month. calders sculptures never get boring. they just sit there quietly radiating optimism like a battery that never runs out. as far as i can tell from books and photographs the happiness of calders work is his own happiness showing through.jane austeneveryone admires jane austen. add my name to the list. to me she seems the best novelist of all time.im interested in how things work. when i read most novels i pay as much attention to the authors choices as to the story. but in her novels i cant see the gears at work. though id really like to know how she does what she does i cant figure it out because shes so good that her stories dont seem made up. i feel like im reading a description of something that actually happened.i used to read a lot of novels when i was younger. i cant read most anymore because they dont have enough information in them. novels seem so impoverished compared to history and biography. but reading austen is like reading nonfiction. she writes so well you dont even notice her.john mccarthyjohn mccarthy invented lisp the field of or at least the term artificial intelligence and was an early member of both of the top two computer science departments mit and stanford. no one would dispute that hes one of the greats but hes an especial hero to me because of lisp.its hard for us now to understand what a conceptual leap that was at the time. paradoxically one of the reasons his achievement is hard to appreciate is that it was so successful. practically every programming language invented in the last 20 years includes ideas from lisp and each year the median language gets more lisplike.in 1958 these ideas were anything but obvious. in 1958 there seem to have been two ways of thinking about programming. some people thought of it as math and proved things about turing machines. others thought of it as a way to get things done and designed languages all too influenced by the technology of the day. mccarthy alone bridged the gap. he designed a language that was math. but designed is not really the word discovered is more like it.the spitfireas i was making this list i found myself thinking of people like douglas bader and r.j. mitchell and jeffrey quill and i realized that though all of them had done many things in their lives there was one factor above all that connected them the spitfire.this is supposed to be a list of heroes. how can a machine be on it because that machine was not just a machine. it was a lens of heroes. extraordinary devotion went into it and extraordinary courage came out.its a cliche to call world war ii a contest between good and evil but between fighter designs it really was. the spitfires original nemesis the me 109 was a brutally practical plane. it was a killing machine. the spitfire was optimism embodied. and not just in its beautiful lines it was at the edge of what could be manufactured. but taking the high road worked. in the air beauty had the edge just.steve jobspeople alive when kennedy was killed usually remember exactly where they were when they heard about it. i remember exactly where i was when a friend asked if id heard steve jobs had cancer. it was like the floor dropped out. a few seconds later she told me that it was a rare operable type and that hed be ok. but those seconds seemed long.i wasnt sure whether to include jobs on this list. a lot of people at apple seem to be afraid of him which is a bad sign. but he compels admiration.theres no name for what steve jobs is because there hasnt been anyone quite like him before. he doesnt design apples products himself. historically the closest analogy to what he does are the great renaissance patrons of the arts. as the ceo of a company that makes him unique.most ceos delegate taste to a subordinate. the design paradox means theyre choosing more or less at random. but steve jobs actually has taste himself  such good taste that hes shown the world how much more important taste is than they realized.isaac newtonnewton has a strange role in my pantheon of heroes hes the one i reproach myself with. he worked on big things at least for part of his life. its so easy to get distracted working on small stuff. the questions youre answering are pleasantly familiar. you get immediate rewards  in fact you get bigger rewards in your time if you work on matters of passing importance. but im uncomfortably aware that this is the route to welldeserved obscurity.to do really great things you have to seek out questions people didnt even realize were questions. there have probably been other people who did this as well as newton for their time but newton is my model of this kind of thought. i can just begin to understand what it must have felt like for him.you only get one life. why not do something huge the phrase paradigm shift is overused now but kuhn was onto something. and you know more are out there separated from us by what will later seem a surprisingly thin wall of laziness and stupidity. if we work like newton.

for nearly all of history the success of a society was proportionate to its ability to assemble large and disciplined organizations. those who bet on economies of scale generally won which meant the largest organizations were the most successful ones.things have already changed so much that this is hard for us to believe but till just a few decades ago the largest organizations tended to be the most progressive. an ambitious kid graduating from college in 1960 wanted to work in the huge gleaming offices of ford or general electric or nasa. small meant smalltime. small in 1960 didnt mean a cool little startup. it meant uncle sids shoe store.when i grew up in the 1970s the idea of the corporate ladder was still very much alive. the standard plan was to try to get into a good college from which one would be drafted into some organization and then rise to positions of gradually increasing responsibility. the more ambitious merely hoped to climb the same ladder faster. 1but in the late twentieth century something changed. it turned out that economies of scale were not the only force at work. particularly in technology the increase in speed one could get from smaller groups started to trump the advantages of size.the future turned out to be different from the one we were expecting in 1970. the domed cities and flying cars we expected have failed to materialize. but fortunately so have the jumpsuits with badges indicating our specialty and rank. instead of being dominated by a few giant treestructured organizations its now looking like the economy of the future will be a fluid network of smaller independent units.its not so much that large organizations stopped working. theres no evidence that famously successful organizations like the roman army or the british east india company were any less afflicted by protocol and politics than organizations of the same size today. but they were competing against opponents who couldnt change the rules on the fly by discovering new technology. now it turns out the rule large and disciplined organizations win needs to have a qualification appended at games that change slowly. no one knew till change reached a sufficient speed.large organizations will start to do worse now though because for the first time in history theyre no longer getting the best people. an ambitious kid graduating from college now doesnt want to work for a big company. they want to work for the hot startup thats rapidly growing into one. if theyre really ambitious they want to start it. 2this doesnt mean big companies will disappear. to say that startups will succeed implies that big companies will exist because startups that succeed either become big companies or are acquired by them. 3 but large organizations will probably never again play the leading role they did up till the last quarter of the twentieth century.its kind of surprising that a trend that lasted so long would ever run out. how often does it happen that a rule works for thousands of years then switches polaritythe millennialong run of biggerisbetter left us with a lot of traditions that are now obsolete but extremely deeply rooted. which means the ambitious can now do arbitrage on them. it will be very valuable to understand precisely which ideas to keep and which can now be discarded.the place to look is where the spread of smallness began in the world of startups.there have always been occasional cases particularly in the us of ambitious people who grew the ladder under them instead of climbing it. but till recently this was an anomalous route that tended to be followed only by outsiders. it was no coincidence that the great industrialists of the nineteenth century had so little formal education. as huge as their companies eventually became they were all essentially mechanics and shopkeepers at first. that was a social step no one with a college education would take if they could avoid it. till the rise of technology startups and in particular internet startups it was very unusual for educated people to start their own businesses.the eight men who left shockley semiconductor to found fairchild semiconductor the original silicon valley startup werent even trying to start a company at first. they were just looking for a company willing to hire them as a group. then one of their parents introduced them to a small investment bank that offered to find funding for them to start their own so they did. but starting a company was an alien idea to them it was something they backed into. 4now i would guess that practically every stanford or berkeley undergrad who knows how to program has at least considered the idea of starting a startup. east coast universities are not far behind and british universities only a little behind them. this pattern suggests that attitudes at stanford and berkeley are not an anomaly but a leading indicator. this is the way the world is going.of course internet startups are still only a fraction of the worlds economy. could a trend based on them be that powerfuli think so. theres no reason to suppose theres any limit to the amount of work that could be done in this area. like science wealth seems to expand fractally. steam power was a sliver of the british economy when watt started working on it. but his work led to more work till that sliver had expanded into something bigger than the whole economy of which it had initially been a part.the same thing could happen with the internet. if internet startups offer the best opportunity for ambitious people then a lot of ambitious people will start them and this bit of the economy will balloon in the usual fractal way.even if internetrelated applications only become a tenth of the worlds economy this component will set the tone for the rest. the most dynamic part of the economy always does in everything from salaries to standards of dress. not just because of its prestige but because the principles underlying the most dynamic part of the economy tend to be ones that work.for the future the trend to bet on seems to be networks of small autonomous groups whose performance is measured individually. and the societies that win will be the ones with the least impedance.as with the original industrial revolution some societies are going to be better at this than others. within a generation of its birth in england the industrial revolution had spread to continental europe and north america. but it didnt spread everywhere. this new way of doing things could only take root in places that were prepared for it. it could only spread to places that already had a vigorous middle class.there is a similar social component to the transformation that began in silicon valley in the 1960s. two new kinds of techniques were developed there techniques for building integrated circuits and techniques for building a new type of company designed to grow fast by creating new technology. the techniques for building integrated circuits spread rapidly to other countries. but the techniques for building startups didnt. fifty years later startups are ubiquitous in silicon valley and common in a handful of other us cities but theyre still an anomaly in most of the world.part of the reasonpossibly the main reasonthat startups have not spread as broadly as the industrial revolution did is their social disruptiveness. though it brought many social changes the industrial revolution was not fighting the principle that bigger is better. quite the opposite the two dovetailed beautifully. the new industrial companies adapted the customs of existing large organizations like the military and the civil service and the resulting hybrid worked well. captains of industry issued orders to armies of workers and everyone knew what they were supposed to do.startups seem to go more against the grain socially. its hard for them to flourish in societies that value hierarchy and stability just as it was hard for industrialization to flourish in societies ruled by people who stole at will from the merchant class. but there were already a handful of countries past that stage when the industrial revolution happened. there do not seem to be that many ready this time.

the reason startups have been using more convertible notes in angel rounds is that they make deals close faster. by making it easier for startups to give different prices to different investors they help them break the sort of deadlock that happens when investors all wait to see who else is going to invest.by far the biggest influence on investors opinions of a startup is the opinion of other investors. there are very very few who simply decide for themselves. any startup founder can tell you the most common question they hear from investors is not about the founders or the product but who else is investingthat tends to produce deadlocks. raising an oldfashioned fixedsize equity round can take weeks because all the angels sit around waiting for the others to commit like competitors in a bicycle sprint who deliberately ride slowly at the start so they can follow whoever breaks first.convertible notes let startups beat such deadlocks by rewarding investors willing to move first with lower effective valuations. which they deserve because theyre taking more risk. its much safer to invest in a startup ron conway has already invested in someone who comes after him should pay a higher price.the reason convertible notes allow more flexibility in price is that valuation caps arent actual valuations and notes are cheap and easy to do. so you can do highresolution fundraising if you wanted you could have a separate note with a different cap for each investor.that cap need not simply rise monotonically. a startup could also give better deals to investors they expected to help them most. the point is simply that different investors whether because of the help they offer or their willingness to commit have different values for startups and their terms should reflect that.different terms for different investors is clearly the way of the future. markets always evolve toward higher resolution. you may not need to use convertible notes to do it. with sufficiently lightweight standardized equity terms and some changes in investors and lawyers expectations about equity rounds you might be able to do the same thing with equity instead of debt. either would be fine with startups so long as they can easily change their valuation.deadlocks werent the only problem with fixedsize equity rounds. another was that startups had to decide in advance how much to raise. i think its a mistake for a startup to fix upon a specific number. if investors are easily convinced the startup should raise more now and if investors are skeptical the startup should take a smaller amount and use that to get the company to the point where its more convincing.its just not reasonable to expect startups to pick an optimal round size in advance because that depends on the reactions of investors and those are impossible to predict.fixedsize multiinvestor angel rounds are such a bad idea for startups that one wonders why things were ever done that way. one possibility is that this custom reflects the way investors like to collude when they can get away with it. but i think the actual explanation is less sinister. i think angels and their lawyers organized rounds this way in unthinking imitation of vc series a rounds. in a series a a fixedsize equity round with a lead makes sense because there is usually just one big investor who is unequivocally the lead. fixedsize series a rounds already are high res. but the more investors you have in a round the less sense it makes for everyone to get the same price.the most interesting question here may be what high res fundraising will do to the world of investors. bolder investors will now get rewarded with lower prices. but more important in a hitsdriven business is that theyll be able to get into the deals they want. whereas the who else is investing type of investors will not only pay higher prices but may not be able to get into the best deals at all.

if you look at a list of us cities sorted by population the number of successful startups per capita varies by orders of magnitude. somehow its as if most places were sprayed with startupicide.i wondered about this for years. i could see the average town was like a roach motel for startup ambitions smart ambitious people went in but no startups came out. but i was never able to figure out exactly what happened inside the motelexactly what was killing all the potential startups. 1a couple weeks ago i finally figured it out. i was framing the question wrong. the problem is not that most towns kill startups. its that death is the default for startups and most towns dont save them. instead of thinking of most places as being sprayed with startupicide its more accurate to think of startups as all being poisoned and a few places being sprayed with the antidote.startups in other places are just doing what startups naturally do fail. the real question is whats saving startups in places like silicon valley 2environmenti think there are two components to the antidote being in a place where startups are the cool thing to do and chance meetings with people who can help you. and what drives them both is the number of startup people around you.the first component is particularly helpful in the first stage of a startups life when you go from merely having an interest in starting a company to actually doing it. its quite a leap to start a startup. its an unusual thing to do. but in silicon valley it seems normal. 3in most places if you start a startup people treat you as if youre unemployed. people in the valley arent automatically impressed with you just because youre starting a company but they pay attention. anyone whos been here any amount of time knows not to default to skepticism no matter how inexperienced you seem or how unpromising your idea sounds at first because theyve all seen inexperienced founders with unpromising sounding ideas who a few years later were billionaires.having people around you care about what youre doing is an extraordinarily powerful force. even the most willful people are susceptible to it. about a year after we started y combinator i said something to a partner at a well known vc firm that gave him the mistaken impression i was considering starting another startup. he responded so eagerly that for about half a second i found myself considering doing it.in most other cities the prospect of starting a startup just doesnt seem real. in the valley its not only real but fashionable. that no doubt causes a lot of people to start startups who shouldnt. but i think thats ok. few people are suited to running a startup and its very hard to predict beforehand which are as i know all too well from being in the business of trying to predict beforehand so lots of people starting startups who shouldnt is probably the optimal state of affairs. as long as youre at a point in your life when you can bear the risk of failure the best way to find out if youre suited to running a startup is to try it.chancethe second component of the antidote is chance meetings with people who can help you. this force works in both phases both in the transition from the desire to start a startup to starting one and the transition from starting a company to succeeding. the power of chance meetings is more variable than people around you caring about startups which is like a sort of background radiation that affects everyone equally but at its strongest it is far stronger.chance meetings produce miracles to compensate for the disasters that characteristically befall startups. in the valley terrible things happen to startups all the time just like they do to startups everywhere. the reason startups are more likely to make it here is that great things happen to them too. in the valley lightning has a sign bit.for example you start a site for college students and you decide to move to the valley for the summer to work on it. and then on a random suburban street in palo alto you happen to run into sean parker who understands the domain really well because he started a similar startup himself and also knows all the investors. and moreover has advanced views for 2004 on founders retaining control of their companies.you cant say precisely what the miracle will be or even for sure that one will happen. the best one can say is if youre in a startup hub unexpected good things will probably happen to you especially if you deserve them.i bet this is true even for startups we fund. even with us working to make things happen for them on purpose rather than by accident the frequency of helpful chance meetings in the valley is so high that its still a significant increment on what we can deliver.chance meetings play a role like the role relaxation plays in having ideas. most people have had the experience of working hard on some problem not being able to solve it giving up and going to bed and then thinking of the answer in the shower in the morning. what makes the answer appear is letting your thoughts drift a bitand thus drift off the wrong path youd been pursuing last night and onto the right one adjacent to it.chance meetings let your acquaintance drift in the same way taking a shower lets your thoughts drift. the critical thing in both cases is that they drift just the right amount. the meeting between larry page and sergey brin was a good example. they let their acquaintance drift but only a little they were both meeting someone they had a lot in common with.for larry page the most important component of the antidote was sergey brin and vice versa. the antidote is people. its not the physical infrastructure of silicon valley that makes it work or the weather or anything like that. those helped get it started but now that the reaction is selfsustaining what drives it is the people.many observers have noticed that one of the most distinctive things about startup hubs is the degree to which people help one another out with no expectation of getting anything in return. im not sure why this is so. perhaps its because startups are less of a zero sum game than most types of business they are rarely killed by competitors. or perhaps its because so many startup founders have backgrounds in the sciences where collaboration is encouraged.a large part of ycs function is to accelerate that process. were a sort of valley within the valley where the density of people working on startups and their willingness to help one another are both artificially amplified.numbersboth components of the antidotean environment that encourages startups and chance meetings with people who help youare driven by the same underlying cause the number of startup people around you. to make a startup hub you need a lot of people interested in startups.there are three reasons. the first obviously is that if you dont have enough density the chance meetings dont happen. 4 the second is that different startups need such different things so you need a lot of people to supply each startup with what they need most. sean parker was exactly what facebook needed in 2004. another startup might have needed a database guy or someone with connections in the movie business.this is one of the reasons we fund such a large number of companies incidentally. the bigger the community the greater the chance it will contain the person who has that one thing you need most.the third reason you need a lot of people to make a startup hub is that once you have enough people interested in the same problem they start to set the social norms. and it is a particularly valuable thing when the atmosphere around you encourages you to do something that would otherwise seem too ambitious. in most places the atmosphere pulls you back toward the mean.i flew into the bay area a few days ago. i notice this every time i fly over the valley somehow you can sense something is going on. obviously you can sense prosperity in how well kept a place looks. but there are different kinds of prosperity. silicon valley doesnt look like boston or new york or la or dc. i tried asking myself what word id use to describe the feeling the valley radiated and the word that came to mind was optimism.notes1 im not saying its impossible to succeed in a city with few other startups just harder. if youre sufficiently good at generating your own morale you can survive without external encouragement. wufoo was based in tampa and they succeeded. but the wufoos are exceptionally disciplined.2 incidentally this phenomenon is not limited to startups. most unusual ambitions fail unless the person who has them manages to find the right sort of community.3 starting a company is common but starting a startup is rare. ive talked about the distinction between the two elsewhere but essentially a startup is a new business designed for scale. most new businesses are service businesses and except in rare cases those dont scale.4 as i was writing this i had a demonstration of the density of startup people in the valley. jessica and i bicycled to university ave in palo alto to have lunch at the fabulous orens hummus. as we walked in we met charlie cheever sitting near the door. selina tobaccowala stopped to say hello on her way out. then josh wilson came in to pick up a take out order. after lunch we went to get frozen yogurt. on the way we met rajat suri. when we got to the yogurt place we found dave shen there and as we walked out we ran into yuri sagalov. we walked with him for a block or so and we ran into muzzammil zaveri and then a block later we met aydin senkut. this is everyday life in palo alto. i wasnt trying to meet people i was just having lunch. and im sure for every startup founder or investor i saw that i knew there were 5 more i didnt. if ron conway had been with us he would have met 30 people he knew.

one advantage of y combinators early broad focus is that we see trends before most other people. and one of the most conspicuous trends in the last batch was the large number of hardware startups. out of 84 companies 7 were making hardware. on the whole theyve done better than the companies that werent.theyve faced resistance from investors of course. investors have a deepseated bias against hardware. but investors opinions are a trailing indicator. the best founders are better at seeing the future than the best investors because the best founders are making it.there is no one single force driving this trend. hardware does well on crowdfunding sites. the spread of tablets makes it possible to build new things controlled by and even incorporating them. electric motors have improved. wireless connectivity of various types can now be taken for granted. its getting more straightforward to get things manufactured. arduinos 3d printing laser cutters and more accessible cnc milling are making hardware easier to prototype. retailers are less of a bottleneck as customers increasingly buy online.one question i can answer is why hardware is suddenly cool. it always was cool. physical things are great. they just havent been as great a way to start a rapidly growing business as software. but that rule may not be permanent. its not even that old it only dates from about 1990. maybe the advantage of software will turn out to have been temporary. hackers love to build hardware and customers love to buy it. so if the ease of shipping hardware even approached the ease of shipping software wed see a lot more hardware startups.it wouldnt be the first time something was a bad idea till it wasnt. and it wouldnt be the first time investors learned that lesson from founders.so if you want to work on hardware dont be deterred from doing it because you worry investors will discriminate against you. and in particular dont be deterred from applying to y combinator with a hardware idea because were especially interested in hardware startups.we know theres room for the next steve jobs. but theres almost certainly also room for the first your name here.

it might not seem theres much to learn about how to work hard. anyone whos been to school knows what it entails even if they chose not to do it. there are 12 year olds who work amazingly hard. and yet when i ask if i know more about working hard now than when i was in school the answer is definitely yes.one thing i know is that if you want to do great things youll have to work very hard. i wasnt sure of that as a kid. schoolwork varied in difficulty one didnt always have to work super hard to do well. and some of the things famous adults did they seemed to do almost effortlessly. was there perhaps some way to evade hard work through sheer brilliance now i know the answer to that question. there isnt.the reason some subjects seemed easy was that my school had low standards. and the reason famous adults seemed to do things effortlessly was years of practice they made it look easy.of course those famous adults usually had a lot of natural ability too. there are three ingredients in great work natural ability practice and effort. you can do pretty well with just two but to do the best work you need all three you need great natural ability and to have practiced a lot and to be trying very hard. 1bill gates for example was among the smartest people in business in his era but he was also among the hardest working. i never took a day off in my twenties he said. not one. it was similar with lionel messi. he had great natural ability but when his youth coaches talk about him what they remember is not his talent but his dedication and his desire to win. p. g. wodehouse would probably get my vote for best english writer of the 20th century if i had to choose. certainly no one ever made it look easier. but no one ever worked harder. at 74 he wrotewith each new book of mine i have as i say the feeling that this time i have picked a lemon in the garden of literature. a good thing really i suppose. keeps one up on ones toes and makes one rewrite every sentence ten times. or in many cases twenty times.sounds a bit extreme you think. and yet bill gates sounds even more extreme. not one day off in ten years these two had about as much natural ability as anyone could have and yet they also worked about as hard as anyone could work. you need both.that seems so obvious and yet in practice we find it slightly hard to grasp. theres a faint xor between talent and hard work. it comes partly from popular culture where it seems to run very deep and partly from the fact that the outliers are so rare. if great talent and great drive are both rare then people with both are rare squared. most people you meet who have a lot of one will have less of the other. but youll need both if you want to be an outlier yourself. and since you cant really change how much natural talent you have in practice doing great work insofar as you can reduces to working very hard.its straightforward to work hard if you have clearly defined externally imposed goals as you do in school. there is some technique to it you have to learn not to lie to yourself not to procrastinate which is a form of lying to yourself not to get distracted and not to give up when things go wrong. but this level of discipline seems to be within the reach of quite young children if they want it.what ive learned since i was a kid is how to work toward goals that are neither clearly defined nor externally imposed. youll probably have to learn both if you want to do really great things.the most basic level of which is simply to feel you should be working without anyone telling you to. now when im not working hard alarm bells go off. i cant be sure im getting anywhere when im working hard but i can be sure im getting nowhere when im not and it feels awful. 2there wasnt a single point when i learned this. like most little kids i enjoyed the feeling of achievement when i learned or did something new. as i grew older this morphed into a feeling of disgust when i wasnt achieving anything. the one precisely dateable landmark i have is when i stopped watching tv at age 13.several people ive talked to remember getting serious about work around this age. when i asked patrick collison when he started to find idleness distasteful he saidi think around age 13 or 14. i have a clear memory from around then of sitting in the sitting room staring outside and wondering why i was wasting my summer holiday.perhaps something changes at adolescence. that would make sense.strangely enough the biggest obstacle to getting serious about work was probably school which made work what they called work seem boring and pointless. i had to learn what real work was before i could wholeheartedly desire to do it. that took a while because even in college a lot of the work is pointless there are entire departments that are pointless. but as i learned the shape of real work i found that my desire to do it slotted into it as if theyd been made for each other.i suspect most people have to learn what work is before they can love it. hardy wrote eloquently about this in a mathematicians apologyi do not remember having felt as a boy any passion for mathematics and such notions as i may have had of the career of a mathematician were far from noble. i thought of mathematics in terms of examinations and scholarships i wanted to beat other boys and this seemed to be the way in which i could do so most decisively.he didnt learn what math was really about till part way through college when he read jordans cours danalyse.i shall never forget the astonishment with which i read that remarkable work the first inspiration for so many mathematicians of my generation and learnt for the first time as i read it what mathematics really meant.there are two separate kinds of fakeness you need to learn to discount in order to understand what real work is. one is the kind hardy encountered in school. subjects get distorted when theyre adapted to be taught to kids  often so distorted that theyre nothing like the work done by actual practitioners. 3 the other kind of fakeness is intrinsic to certain types of work. some types of work are inherently bogus or at best mere busywork.theres a kind of solidity to real work. its not all writing the principia but it all feels necessary. thats a vague criterion but its deliberately vague because it has to cover a lot of different types. 4once you know the shape of real work you have to learn how many hours a day to spend on it. you cant solve this problem by simply working every waking hour because in many kinds of work theres a point beyond which the quality of the result will start to decline.that limit varies depending on the type of work and the person. ive done several different kinds of work and the limits were different for each. my limit for the harder types of writing or programming is about five hours a day. whereas when i was running a startup i could work all the time. at least for the three years i did it if id kept going much longer id probably have needed to take occasional vacations. 5the only way to find the limit is by crossing it. cultivate a sensitivity to the quality of the work youre doing and then youll notice if it decreases because youre working too hard. honesty is critical here in both directions you have to notice when youre being lazy but also when youre working too hard. and if you think theres something admirable about working too hard get that idea out of your head. youre not merely getting worse results but getting them because youre showing off  if not to other people then to yourself. 6finding the limit of working hard is a constant ongoing process not something you do just once. both the difficulty of the work and your ability to do it can vary hour to hour so you need to be constantly judging both how hard youre trying and how well youre doing.trying hard doesnt mean constantly pushing yourself to work though. there may be some people who do but i think my experience is fairly typical and i only have to push myself occasionally when im starting a project or when i encounter some sort of check. thats when im in danger of procrastinating. but once i get rolling i tend to keep going.what keeps me going depends on the type of work. when i was working on viaweb i was driven by fear of failure. i barely procrastinated at all then because there was always something that needed doing and if i could put more distance between me and the pursuing beast by doing it why wait 7 whereas what drives me now writing essays is the flaws in them. between essays i fuss for a few days like a dog circling while it decides exactly where to lie down. but once i get started on one i dont have to push myself to work because theres always some error or omission already pushing me.i do make some amount of effort to focus on important topics. many problems have a hard core at the center surrounded by easier stuff at the edges. working hard means aiming toward the center to the extent you can. some days you may not be able to some days youll only be able to work on the easier peripheral stuff. but you should always be aiming as close to the center as you can without stalling.the bigger question of what to do with your life is one of these problems with a hard core. there are important problems at the center which tend to be hard and less important easier ones at the edges. so as well as the small daily adjustments involved in working on a specific problem youll occasionally have to make big lifetimescale adjustments about which type of work to do. and the rule is the same working hard means aiming toward the center  toward the most ambitious problems.by center though i mean the actual center not merely the current consensus about the center. the consensus about which problems are most important is often mistaken both in general and within specific fields. if you disagree with it and youre right that could represent a valuable opportunity to do something new.the more ambitious types of work will usually be harder but although you should not be in denial about this neither should you treat difficulty as an infallible guide in deciding what to do. if you discover some ambitious type of work thats a bargain in the sense of being easier for you than other people either because of the abilities you happen to have or because of some new way youve found to approach it or simply because youre more excited about it by all means work on that. some of the best work is done by people who find an easy way to do something hard.as well as learning the shape of real work you need to figure out which kind youre suited for. and that doesnt just mean figuring out which kind your natural abilities match the best it doesnt mean that if youre 7 feet tall you have to play basketball. what youre suited for depends not just on your talents but perhaps even more on your interests. a deep interest in a topic makes people work harder than any amount of discipline can.it can be harder to discover your interests than your talents. there are fewer types of talent than interest and they start to be judged early in childhood whereas interest in a topic is a subtle thing that may not mature till your twenties or even later. the topic may not even exist earlier. plus there are some powerful sources of error you need to learn to discount. are you really interested in x or do you want to work on it because youll make a lot of money or because other people will be impressed with you or because your parents want you to 8the difficulty of figuring out what to work on varies enormously from one person to another. thats one of the most important things ive learned about work since i was a kid. as a kid you get the impression that everyone has a calling and all they have to do is figure out what it is. thats how it works in movies and in the streamlined biographies fed to kids. sometimes it works that way in real life. some people figure out what to do as children and just do it like mozart. but others like newton turn restlessly from one kind of work to another. maybe in retrospect we can identify one as their calling  we can wish newton spent more time on math and physics and less on alchemy and theology  but this is an illusion induced by hindsight bias. there was no voice calling to him that he could have heard.so while some peoples lives converge fast there will be others whose lives never converge. and for these people figuring out what to work on is not so much a prelude to working hard as an ongoing part of it like one of a set of simultaneous equations. for these people the process i described earlier has a third component along with measuring both how hard youre working and how well youre doing you have to think about whether you should keep working in this field or switch to another. if youre working hard but not getting good enough results you should switch. it sounds simple expressed that way but in practice its very difficult. you shouldnt give up on the first day just because you work hard and dont get anywhere. you need to give yourself time to get going. but how much time and what should you do if work that was going well stops going well how much time do you give yourself then 9what even counts as good results that can be really hard to decide. if youre exploring an area few others have worked in you may not even know what good results look like. history is full of examples of people who misjudged the importance of what they were working on.the best test of whether its worthwhile to work on something is whether you find it interesting. that may sound like a dangerously subjective measure but its probably the most accurate one youre going to get. youre the one working on the stuff. whos in a better position than you to judge whether its important and whats a better predictor of its importance than whether its interestingfor this test to work though you have to be honest with yourself. indeed thats the most striking thing about the whole question of working hard how at each point it depends on being honest with yourself.working hard is not just a dial you turn up to 11. its a complicated dynamic system that has to be tuned just right at each point. you have to understand the shape of real work see clearly what kind youre best suited for aim as close to the true core of it as you can accurately judge at each moment both what youre capable of and how youre doing and put in as many hours each day as you can without harming the quality of the result. this network is too complicated to trick. but if youre consistently honest and clearsighted it will automatically assume an optimal shape and youll be productive in a way few people are.notes1 in the bus ticket theory of genius i said the three ingredients in great work were natural ability determination and interest. thats the formula in the preceding stage determination and interest yield practice and effort.2 i mean this at a resolution of days not hours. youll often get somewhere while not working in the sense that the solution to a problem comes to you while taking a shower or even in your sleep but only because you were working hard on it the day before.its good to go on vacation occasionally but when i go on vacation i like to learn new things. i wouldnt like just sitting on a beach.3 the thing kids do in school thats most like the real version is sports. admittedly because many sports originated as games played in schools. but in this one area at least kids are doing exactly what adults do.in the average american high school you have a choice of pretending to do something serious or seriously doing something pretend. arguably the latter is no worse.4 knowing what you want to work on doesnt mean youll be able to. most people have to spend a lot of their time working on things they dont want to especially early on. but if you know what you want to do you at least know what direction to nudge your life in.5 the lower time limits for intense work suggest a solution to the problem of having less time to work after you have kids switch to harder problems. in effect i did that though not deliberately.6 some cultures have a tradition of performative hard work. i dont love this idea because a it makes a parody of something important and b it causes people to wear themselves out doing things that dont matter. i dont know enough to say for sure whether its net good or bad but my guess is bad.7 one of the reasons people work so hard on startups is that startups can fail and when they do that failure tends to be both decisive and conspicuous.8 its ok to work on something to make a lot of money. you need to solve the money problem somehow and theres nothing wrong with doing that efficiently by trying to make a lot at once. i suppose it would even be ok to be interested in money for its own sake whatever floats your boat. just so long as youre conscious of your motivations. the thing to avoid is unconsciously letting the need for money warp your ideas about what kind of work you find most interesting.9 many people face this question on a smaller scale with individual projects. but its easier both to recognize and to accept a dead end in a single project than to abandon some type of work entirely. the more determined you are the harder it gets. like a spanish flu victim youre fighting your own immune system instead of giving up you tell yourself i should just try harder. and who can say youre not right

i finally realized today why politics and religion yield such uniquely useless discussions.as a rule any mention of religion on an online forum degenerates into a religious argument. why why does this happen with religion and not with javascript or baking or other topics people talk about on forumswhats different about religion is that people dont feel they need to have any particular expertise to have opinions about it. all they need is strongly held beliefs and anyone can have those. no thread about javascript will grow as fast as one about religion because people feel they have to be over some threshold of expertise to post comments about that. but on religion everyones an expert.then it struck me this is the problem with politics too. politics like religion is a topic where theres no threshold of expertise for expressing an opinion. all you need is strong convictions.do religion and politics have something in common that explains this similarity one possible explanation is that they deal with questions that have no definite answers so theres no back pressure on peoples opinions. since no one can be proven wrong every opinion is equally valid and sensing this everyone lets fly with theirs.but this isnt true. there are certainly some political questions that have definite answers like how much a new government policy will cost. but the more precise political questions suffer the same fate as the vaguer ones.i think what religion and politics have in common is that they become part of peoples identity and people can never have a fruitful argument about something thats part of their identity. by definition theyre partisan.which topics engage peoples identity depends on the people not the topic. for example a discussion about a battle that included citizens of one or more of the countries involved would probably degenerate into a political argument. but a discussion today about a battle that took place in the bronze age probably wouldnt. no one would know what side to be on. so its not politics thats the source of the trouble but identity. when people say a discussion has degenerated into a religious war what they really mean is that it has started to be driven mostly by peoples identities. 1because the point at which this happens depends on the people rather than the topic its a mistake to conclude that because a question tends to provoke religious wars it must have no answer. for example the question of the relative merits of programming languages often degenerates into a religious war because so many programmers identify as x programmers or y programmers. this sometimes leads people to conclude the question must be unanswerablethat all languages are equally good. obviously thats false anything else people make can be well or badly designed why should this be uniquely impossible for programming languages and indeed you can have a fruitful discussion about the relative merits of programming languages so long as you exclude people who respond from identity.more generally you can have a fruitful discussion about a topic only if it doesnt engage the identities of any of the participants. what makes politics and religion such minefields is that they engage so many peoples identities. but you could in principle have a useful conversation about them with some people. and there are other topics that might seem harmless like the relative merits of ford and chevy pickup trucks that you couldnt safely talk about with others.the most intriguing thing about this theory if its right is that it explains not merely which kinds of discussions to avoid but how to have better ideas. if people cant think clearly about anything that has become part of their identity then all other things being equal the best plan is to let as few things into your identity as possible. 2most people reading this will already be fairly tolerant. but there is a step beyond thinking of yourself as x but tolerating y not even to consider yourself an x. the more labels you have for yourself the dumber they make you.notes1 when that happens it tends to happen fast like a core going critical. the threshold for participating goes down to zero which brings in more people. and they tend to say incendiary things which draw more and angrier counterarguments.2 there may be some things its a net win to include in your identity. for example being a scientist. but arguably that is more of a placeholder than an actual labellike putting nmi on a form that asks for your middle initialbecause it doesnt commit you to believing anything in particular. a scientist isnt committed to believing in natural selection in the same way a biblical literalist is committed to rejecting it. all hes committed to is following the evidence wherever it leads.considering yourself a scientist is equivalent to putting a sign in a cupboard saying this cupboard must be kept empty. yes strictly speaking youre putting something in the cupboard but not in the ordinary sense.

since the 1970s economic inequality in the us has increased dramatically. and in particular the rich have gotten a lot richer. nearly everyone who writes about the topic says that economic inequality should be decreased.im interested in this question because i was one of the founders of a company called y combinator that helps people start startups. almost by definition if a startup succeeds its founders become rich. which means by helping startup founders ive been helping to increase economic inequality. if economic inequality should be decreased i shouldnt be helping founders. no one should be.but that doesnt sound right. whats going on here whats going on is that while economic inequality is a single measure or more precisely two variation in income and variation in wealth it has multiple causes. many of these causes are bad like tax loopholes and drug addiction. but some are good like larry page and sergey brin starting the company you use to find things online.if you want to understand economic inequality  and more importantly if you actually want to fix the bad aspects of it  you have to tease apart the components. and yet the trend in nearly everything written about the subject is to do the opposite to squash together all the aspects of economic inequality as if it were a single phenomenon.sometimes this is done for ideological reasons. sometimes its because the writer only has very highlevel data and so draws conclusions from that like the proverbial drunk who looks for his keys under the lamppost instead of where he dropped them because the light is better there. sometimes its because the writer doesnt understand critical aspects of inequality like the role of technology in wealth creation. much of the time perhaps most of the time writing about economic inequality combines all three.the most common mistake people make about economic inequality is to treat it as a single phenomenon. the most naive version of which is the one based on the pie fallacy that the rich get rich by taking money from the poor.usually this is an assumption people start from rather than a conclusion they arrive at by examining the evidence. sometimes the pie fallacy is stated explicitly...those at the top are grabbing an increasing fraction of the nations income  so much of a larger share that whats left over for the rest is diminished.... 1other times its more unconscious. but the unconscious form is very widespread. i think because we grow up in a world where the pie fallacy is actually true. to kids wealth is a fixed pie thats shared out and if one person gets more its at the expense of another. it takes a conscious effort to remind oneself that the real world doesnt work that way.in the real world you can create wealth as well as taking it from others. a woodworker creates wealth. he makes a chair and you willingly give him money in return for it. a highfrequency trader does not. he makes a dollar only when someone on the other end of a trade loses a dollar.if the rich people in a society got that way by taking wealth from the poor then you have the degenerate case of economic inequality where the cause of poverty is the same as the cause of wealth. but instances of inequality dont have to be instances of the degenerate case. if one woodworker makes 5 chairs and another makes none the second woodworker will have less money but not because anyone took anything from him.even people sophisticated enough to know about the pie fallacy are led toward it by the custom of describing economic inequality as a ratio of one quantiles income or wealth to anothers. its so easy to slip from talking about income shifting from one quantile to another as a figure of speech into believing that is literally whats happening.except in the degenerate case economic inequality cant be described by a ratio or even a curve. in the general case it consists of multiple ways people become poor and multiple ways people become rich. which means to understand economic inequality in a country you have to go find individual people who are poor or rich and figure out why. 2if you want to understand change in economic inequality you should ask what those people would have done when it was different. this is one way i know the rich arent all getting richer simply from some new system for transferring wealth to them from everyone else. when you use the wouldhave method with startup founders you find what most would have done back in 1960 when economic inequality was lower was to join big companies or become professors. before mark zuckerberg started facebook his default expectation was that hed end up working at microsoft. the reason he and most other startup founders are richer than they would have been in the mid 20th century is not because of some right turn the country took during the reagan administration but because progress in technology has made it much easier to start a new company that grows fast.traditional economists seem strangely averse to studying individual humans. it seems to be a rule with them that everything has to start with statistics. so they give you very precise numbers about variation in wealth and income then follow it with the most naive speculation about the underlying causes.but while there are a lot of people who get rich through rentseeking of various forms and a lot who get rich by playing zerosum games there are also a significant number who get rich by creating wealth. and creating wealth as a source of economic inequality is different from taking it  not just morally but also practically in the sense that it is harder to eradicate. one reason is that variation in productivity is accelerating. the rate at which individuals can create wealth depends on the technology available to them and that grows exponentially. the other reason creating wealth is such a tenacious source of inequality is that it can expand to accommodate a lot of people.im all for shutting down the crooked ways to get rich. but that wont eliminate great variations in wealth because as long as you leave open the option of getting rich by creating wealth people who want to get rich will do that instead.most people who get rich tend to be fairly driven. whatever their other flaws laziness is usually not one of them. suppose new policies make it hard to make a fortune in finance. does it seem plausible that the people who currently go into finance to make their fortunes will continue to do so but be content to work for ordinary salaries the reason they go into finance is not because they love finance but because they want to get rich. if the only way left to get rich is to start startups theyll start startups. theyll do well at it too because determination is the main factor in the success of a startup. 3 and while it would probably be a good thing for the world if people who wanted to get rich switched from playing zerosum games to creating wealth that would not only not eliminate great variations in wealth but might even exacerbate them. in a zerosum game there is at least a limit to the upside. plus a lot of the new startups would create new technology that further accelerated variation in productivity.variation in productivity is far from the only source of economic inequality but it is the irreducible core of it in the sense that youll have that left when you eliminate all other sources. and if you do that core will be big because it will have expanded to include the efforts of all the refugees. plus it will have a large baumol penumbra around it anyone who could get rich by creating wealth on their own account will have to be paid enough to prevent them from doing it.you cant prevent great variations in wealth without preventing people from getting rich and you cant do that without preventing them from starting startups.so lets be clear about that. eliminating great variations in wealth would mean eliminating startups. and that doesnt seem a wise move. especially since it would only mean you eliminated startups in your own country. ambitious people already move halfway around the world to further their careers and startups can operate from anywhere nowadays. so if you made it impossible to get rich by creating wealth in your country people who wanted to do that would just leave and do it somewhere else. which would certainly get you a lower gini coefficient along with a lesson in being careful what you ask for. 4i think rising economic inequality is the inevitable fate of countries that dont choose something worse. we had a 40 year stretch in the middle of the 20th century that convinced some people otherwise. but as i explained in the refragmentation that was an anomaly  a unique combination of circumstances that compressed american society not just economically but culturally too. 5and while some of the growth in economic inequality weve seen since then has been due to bad behavior of various kinds there has simultaneously been a huge increase in individuals ability to create wealth. startups are almost entirely a product of this period. and even within the startup world there has been a qualitative change in the last 10 years. technology has decreased the cost of starting a startup so much that founders now have the upper hand over investors. founders get less diluted and it is now common for them to retain board control as well. both further increase economic inequality the former because founders own more stock and the latter because as investors have learned founders tend to be better at running their companies than investors.while the surface manifestations change the underlying forces are very very old. the acceleration of productivity we see in silicon valley has been happening for thousands of years. if you look at the history of stone tools technology was already accelerating in the mesolithic. the acceleration would have been too slow to perceive in one lifetime. such is the nature of the leftmost part of an exponential curve. but it was the same curve.you do not want to design your society in a way thats incompatible with this curve. the evolution of technology is one of the most powerful forces in history.louis brandeis said we may have democracy or we may have wealth concentrated in the hands of a few but we cant have both. that sounds plausible. but if i have to choose between ignoring him and ignoring an exponential curve that has been operating for thousands of years ill bet on the curve. ignoring any trend that has been operating for thousands of years is dangerous. but exponential growth especially tends to bite you.if accelerating variation in productivity is always going to produce some baseline growth in economic inequality it would be a good idea to spend some time thinking about that future. can you have a healthy society with great variation in wealth what would it look likenotice how novel it feels to think about that. the public conversation so far has been exclusively about the need to decrease economic inequality. weve barely given a thought to how to live with it.im hopeful well be able to. brandeis was a product of the gilded age and things have changed since then. its harder to hide wrongdoing now. and to get rich now you dont have to buy politicians the way railroad or oil magnates did. 6 the great concentrations of wealth i see around me in silicon valley dont seem to be destroying democracy.there are lots of things wrong with the us that have economic inequality as a symptom. we should fix those things. in the process we may decrease economic inequality. but we cant start from the symptom and hope to fix the underlying causes. 7the most obvious is poverty. im sure most of those who want to decrease economic inequality want to do it mainly to help the poor not to hurt the rich. 8 indeed a good number are merely being sloppy by speaking of decreasing economic inequality when what they mean is decreasing poverty. but this is a situation where it would be good to be precise about what we want. poverty and economic inequality are not identical. when the city is turning off your water because you cant pay the bill it doesnt make any difference what larry pages net worth is compared to yours. he might only be a few times richer than you and it would still be just as much of a problem that your water was getting turned off.closely related to poverty is lack of social mobility. ive seen this myself you dont have to grow up rich or even upper middle class to get rich as a startup founder but few successful founders grew up desperately poor. but again the problem here is not simply economic inequality. there is an enormous difference in wealth between the household larry page grew up in and that of a successful startup founder but that didnt prevent him from joining their ranks. its not economic inequality per se thats blocking social mobility but some specific combination of things that go wrong when kids grow up sufficiently poor.one of the most important principles in silicon valley is that you make what you measure. it means that if you pick some number to focus on it will tend to improve but that you have to choose the right number because only the one you choose will improve another that seems conceptually adjacent might not. for example if youre a university president and you decide to focus on graduation rates then youll improve graduation rates. but only graduation rates not how much students learn. students could learn less if to improve graduation rates you made classes easier.economic inequality is sufficiently far from identical with the various problems that have it as a symptom that well probably only hit whichever of the two we aim at. if we aim at economic inequality we wont fix these problems. so i say lets aim at the problems.for example lets attack poverty and if necessary damage wealth in the process. thats much more likely to work than attacking wealth in the hope that you will thereby fix poverty. 9 and if there are people getting rich by tricking consumers or lobbying the government for anticompetitive regulations or tax loopholes then lets stop them. not because its causing economic inequality but because its stealing. 10if all you have is statistics it seems like thats what you need to fix. but behind a broad statistical measure like economic inequality there are some things that are good and some that are bad some that are historical trends with immense momentum and others that are random accidents. if we want to fix the world behind the statistics we have to understand it and focus our efforts where theyll do the most good.notes1 stiglitz joseph. the price of inequality. norton 2012. p. 32.2 particularly since economic inequality is a matter of outliers and outliers are disproportionately likely to have gotten where they are by ways that have little do with the sort of things economists usually think about like wages and productivity but rather by say ending up on the wrong side of the war on drugs.3 determination is the most important factor in deciding between success and failure which in startups tend to be sharply differentiated. but it takes more than determination to create one of the hugely successful startups. though most founders start out excited about the idea of getting rich purely mercenary founders will usually take one of the big acquisition offers most successful startups get on the way up. the founders who go on to the next stage tend to be driven by a sense of mission. they have the same attachment to their companies that an artist or writer has to their work. but it is very hard to predict at the outset which founders will do that. its not simply a function of their initial attitude. starting a company changes people.4 after reading a draft of this essay richard florida told me how he had once talked to a group of europeans who said they wanted to make europe more entrepreneurial and more like silicon valley. i said by definition this will give you more inequality. they thought i was insane  they could not process it.5 economic inequality has been decreasing globally. but this is mainly due to the erosion of the kleptocracies that formerly dominated all the poorer countries. once the playing field is leveler politically well see economic inequality start to rise again. the us is the bellwether. the situation we face here the rest of the world will sooner or later.6 some people still get rich by buying politicians. my point is that its no longer a precondition.7 as well as problems that have economic inequality as a symptom there are those that have it as a cause. but in most if not all economic inequality is not the primary cause. there is usually some injustice that is allowing economic inequality to turn into other forms of inequality and that injustice is what we need to fix. for example the police in the us treat the poor worse than the rich. but the solution is not to make people richer. its to make the police treat people more equitably. otherwise theyll continue to maltreat people who are weak in other ways.8 some who read this essay will say that im clueless or even being deliberately misleading by focusing so much on the richer end of economic inequality  that economic inequality is really about poverty. but that is exactly the point im making though sloppier language than id use to make it. the real problem is poverty not economic inequality. and if you conflate them youre aiming at the wrong target.others will say im clueless or being misleading by focusing on people who get rich by creating wealth  that startups arent the problem but corrupt practices in finance healthcare and so on. once again that is exactly my point. the problem is not economic inequality but those specific abuses.its a strange task to write an essay about why something isnt the problem but thats the situation you find yourself in when so many people mistakenly think it is.9 particularly since many causes of poverty are only partially driven by people trying to make money from them. for example americas abnormally high incarceration rate is a major cause of poverty. but although forprofit prison companies and prison guard unions both spend a lot lobbying for harsh sentencing laws they are not the original source of them.10 incidentally tax loopholes are definitely not a product of some power shift due to recent increases in economic inequality. the golden age of economic equality in the mid 20th century was also the golden age of tax avoidance. indeed it was so widespread and so effective that im skeptical whether economic inequality was really so low then as we think. in a period when people are trying to hide wealth from the government it will tend to be hidden from statistics too. one sign of the potential magnitude of the problem is the discrepancy between government receipts as a percentage of gdp which have remained more or less constant during the entire period from the end of world war ii to the present and tax rates which have varied dramatically.thanks to sam altman tiffani ashley bell patrick collison ron conway richard florida ben horowitz jessica livingston robert morris tim oreilly max roser and alexia tsotsis for reading drafts of this.note this is a new version from which i removed a pair of metaphors that made a lot of people mad essentially by macroexpanding them. if anyone wants to see the old version i put it here.

y combinator has now funded 564 startups including the current batch which has 53. the total valuation of the 287 that have valuations either by raising an equity round getting acquired or dying is about 11.7 billion and the 511 prior to the current batch have collectively raised about 1.7 billion. 1as usual those numbers are dominated by a few big winners. the top 10 startups account for 8.6 of that 11.7 billion. but there is a peloton of younger startups behind them. there are about 40 more that have a shot at being really big.things got a little out of hand last summer when we had 84 companies in the batch so we tightened up our filter to decrease the batch size. 2 several journalists have tried to interpret that as evidence for some macro story they were telling but the reason had nothing to do with any external trend. the reason was that we discovered we were using an n algorithm and we needed to buy time to fix it. fortunately weve come up with several techniques for sharding yc and the problem now seems to be fixed. with a new more scaleable model and only 53 companies the current batch feels like a walk in the park. id guess we can grow another 2 or 3x before hitting the next bottleneck. 3one consequence of funding such a large number of startups is that we see trends early. and since fundraising is one of the main things we help startups with were in a good position to notice trends in investing.im going to take a shot at describing where these trends are leading. lets start with the most basic question will the future be better or worse than the past will investors in the aggregate make more money or lessi think more. there are multiple forces at work some of which will decrease returns and some of which will increase them. i cant predict for sure which forces will prevail but ill describe them and you can decide for yourself.there are two big forces driving change in startup funding its becoming cheaper to start a startup and startups are becoming a more normal thing to do.when i graduated from college in 1986 there were essentially two options get a job or go to grad school. now theres a third start your own company. thats a big change. in principle it was possible to start your own company in 1986 too but it didnt seem like a real possibility. it seemed possible to start a consulting company or a niche product company but it didnt seem possible to start a company that would become big. 4that kind of change from 2 paths to 3 is the sort of big social shift that only happens once every few generations. i think were still at the beginning of this one. its hard to predict how big a deal it will be. as big a deal as the industrial revolution maybe. probably not. but it will be a big enough deal that it takes almost everyone by surprise because those big social shifts always do.one thing we can say for sure is that there will be a lot more startups. the monolithic hierarchical companies of the mid 20th century are being replaced by networks of smaller companies. this process is not just something happening now in silicon valley. it started decades ago and its happening as far afield as the car industry. it has a long way to run. 5the other big driver of change is that startups are becoming cheaper to start. and in fact the two forces are related the decreasing cost of starting a startup is one of the reasons startups are becoming a more normal thing to do.the fact that startups need less money means founders will increasingly have the upper hand over investors. you still need just as much of their energy and imagination but they dont need as much of your money. because founders have the upper hand theyll retain an increasingly large share of the stock in and control of their companies. which means investors will get less stock and less control.does that mean investors will make less money not necessarily because there will be more good startups. the total amount of desirable startup stock available to investors will probably increase because the number of desirable startups will probably grow faster than the percentage they sell to investors shrinks.theres a rule of thumb in the vc business that there are about 15 companies a year that will be really successful. although a lot of investors unconsciously treat this number as if it were some sort of cosmological constant im certain it isnt. there are probably limits on the rate at which technology can develop but thats not the limiting factor now. if it were each successful startup would be founded the month it became possible and that is not the case. right now the limiting factor on the number of big hits is the number of sufficiently good founders starting companies and that number can and will increase. there are still a lot of people whod make great founders who never end up starting a company. you can see that from how randomly some of the most successful startups got started. so many of the biggest startups almost didnt happen that there must be a lot of equally good startups that actually didnt happen.there might be 10x or even 50x more good founders out there. as more of them go ahead and start startups those 15 big hits a year could easily become 50 or even 100. 6what about returns though are we heading for a world in which returns will be pinched by increasingly high valuations i think the top firms will actually make more money than they have in the past. high returns dont come from investing at low valuations. they come from investing in the companies that do really well. so if there are more of those to be had each year the best pickers should have more hits.this means there should be more variability in the vc business. the firms that can recognize and attract the best startups will do even better because there will be more of them to recognize and attract. whereas the bad firms will get the leftovers as they do now and yet pay a higher price for them.nor do i think it will be a problem that founders keep control of their companies for longer. the empirical evidence on that is already clear investors make more money as founders bitches than their bosses. though somewhat humiliating this is actually good news for investors because it takes less time to serve founders than to micromanage them.what about angels i think there is a lot of opportunity there. it used to suck to be an angel investor. you couldnt get access to the best deals unless you got lucky like andy bechtolsheim and when you did invest in a startup vcs might try to strip you of your stock when they arrived later. now an angel can go to something like demo day or angellist and have access to the same deals vcs do. and the days when vcs could wash angels out of the cap table are long gone.i think one of the biggest unexploited opportunities in startup investing right now is angelsized investments made quickly. few investors understand the cost that raising money from them imposes on startups. when the company consists only of the founders everything grinds to a halt during fundraising which can easily take 6 weeks. the current high cost of fundraising means there is room for lowcost investors to undercut the rest. and in this context lowcost means deciding quickly. if there were a reputable investor who invested 100k on good terms and promised to decide yes or no within 24 hours theyd get access to almost all the best deals because every good startup would approach them first. it would be up to them to pick because every bad startup would approach them first too but at least theyd see everything. whereas if an investor is notorious for taking a long time to make up their mind or negotiating a lot about valuation founders will save them for last. and in the case of the most promising startups which tend to have an easy time raising money last can easily become never.will the number of big hits grow linearly with the total number of new startups probably not for two reasons. one is that the scariness of starting a startup in the old days was a pretty effective filter. now that the cost of failing is becoming lower we should expect founders to do it more. thats not a bad thing. its common in technology for an innovation that decreases the cost of failure to increase the number of failures and yet leave you net ahead.the other reason the number of big hits wont grow proportionately to the number of startups is that there will start to be an increasing number of idea clashes. although the finiteness of the number of good ideas is not the reason there are only 15 big hits a year the number has to be finite and the more startups there are the more well see multiple companies doing the same thing at the same time. it will be interesting in a bad way if idea clashes become a lot more common. 7mostly because of the increasing number of early failures the startup business of the future wont simply be the same shape scaled up. what used to be an obelisk will become a pyramid. it will be a little wider at the top but a lot wider at the bottom.what does that mean for investors one thing it means is that there will be more opportunities for investors at the earliest stage because thats where the volume of our imaginary solid is growing fastest. imagine the obelisk of investors that corresponds to the obelisk of startups. as it widens out into a pyramid to match the startup pyramid all the contents are adhering to the top leaving a vacuum at the bottom.that opportunity for investors mostly means an opportunity for new investors because the degree of risk an existing investor or firm is comfortable taking is one of the hardest things for them to change. different types of investors are adapted to different degrees of risk but each has its specific degree of risk deeply imprinted on it not just in the procedures they follow but in the personalities of the people who work there.i think the biggest danger for vcs and also the biggest opportunity is at the series a stage. or rather what used to be the series a stage before series as turned into de facto series b rounds.right now vcs often knowingly invest too much money at the series a stage. they do it because they feel they need to get a big chunk of each series a company to compensate for the opportunity cost of the board seat it consumes. which means when there is a lot of competition for a deal the number that moves is the valuation and thus amount invested rather than the percentage of the company being sold. which means especially in the case of more promising startups that series a investors often make companies take more money than they want.some vcs lie and claim the company really needs that much. others are more candid and admit their financial models require them to own a certain percentage of each company. but we all know the amounts being raised in series a rounds are not determined by asking what would be best for the companies. theyre determined by vcs starting from the amount of the company they want to own and the market setting the valuation and thus the amount invested.like a lot of bad things this didnt happen intentionally. the vc business backed into it as their initial assumptions gradually became obsolete. the traditions and financial models of the vc business were established when founders needed investors more. in those days it was natural for founders to sell vcs a big chunk of their company in the series a round. now founders would prefer to sell less and vcs are digging in their heels because theyre not sure if they can make money buying less than 20 of each series a company.the reason i describe this as a danger is that series a investors are increasingly at odds with the startups they supposedly serve and that tends to come back to bite you eventually. the reason i describe it as an opportunity is that there is now a lot of potential energy built up as the market has moved away from vcs traditional business model. which means the first vc to break ranks and start to do series a rounds for as much equity as founders want to sell and with no option pool that comes only from the founders shares stands to reap huge benefits.what will happen to the vc business when that happens hell if i know. but i bet that particular firm will end up ahead. if one toptier vc firm started to do series a rounds that started from the amount the company needed to raise and let the percentage acquired vary with the market instead of the other way around theyd instantly get almost all the best startups. and thats where the money is.you cant fight market forces forever. over the last decade weve seen the percentage of the company sold in series a rounds creep inexorably downward. 40 used to be common. now vcs are fighting to hold the line at 20. but i am daily waiting for the line to collapse. its going to happen. you may as well anticipate it and look bold.who knows maybe vcs will make more money by doing the right thing. it wouldnt be the first time that happened. venture capital is a business where occasional big successes generate hundredfold returns. how much confidence can you really have in financial models for something like that anyway the big successes only have to get a tiny bit less occasional to compensate for a 2x decrease in the stock sold in series a rounds.if you want to find new opportunities for investing look for things founders complain about. founders are your customers and the things they complain about are unsatisfied demand. ive given two examples of things founders complain about mostinvestors who take too long to make up their minds and excessive dilution in series a roundsso those are good places to look now. but the more general recipe is do something founders want.notes1 i realize revenue and not fundraising is the proper test of success for a startup. the reason we quote statistics about fundraising is because those are the numbers we have. we couldnt talk meaningfully about revenues without including the numbers from the most successful startups and we dont have those. we often discuss revenue growth with the earlier stage startups because thats how we gauge their progress but when companies reach a certain size it gets presumptuous for a seed investor to do that.in any case companies market caps do eventually become a function of revenues and postmoney valuations of funding rounds are at least guesses by pros about where those market caps will end up.the reason only 287 have valuations is that the rest have mostly raised money on convertible notes and although convertible notes often have valuation caps a valuation cap is merely an upper bound on a valuation.2 we didnt try to accept a particular number. we have no way of doing that even if we wanted to. we just tried to be significantly pickier.3 though you never know with bottlenecks im guessing the next one will be coordinating efforts among partners.4 i realize starting a company doesnt have to mean starting a startup. there will be lots of people starting normal companies too. but thats not relevant to an audience of investors.geoff ralston reports that in silicon valley it seemed thinkable to start a startup in the mid 1980s. it would have started there. but i know it didnt to undergraduates on the east coast.5 this trend is one of the main causes of the increase in economic inequality in the us since the mid twentieth century. the person who would in 1950 have been the general manager of the x division of megacorp is now the founder of the x company and owns significant equity in it.6 if congress passes the founder visa in a nonbroken form that alone could in principle get us up to 20x since 95 of the worlds population lives outside the us.7 if idea clashes got bad enough it could change what it means to be a startup. we currently advise startups mostly to ignore competitors. we tell them startups are competitive like running not like soccer you dont have to go and steal the ball away from the other team. but if idea clashes became common enough maybe youd start to have to. that would be unfortunate.

a few months ago an article about y combinator said that early on it had been a oneman show. its sadly common to read that sort of thing. but the problem with that description is not just that its unfair. its also misleading. much of whats most novel about yc is due to jessica livingston. if you dont understand her you dont understand yc. so let me tell you a little about jessica.yc had 4 founders. jessica and i decided one night to start it and the next day we recruited my friends robert morris and trevor blackwell. jessica and i ran yc day to day and robert and trevor read applications and did interviews with us.jessica and i were already dating when we started yc. at first we tried to act professional about this meaning we tried to conceal it. in retrospect that seems ridiculous and we soon dropped the pretense. and the fact that jessica and i were a couple is a big part of what made yc what it was. yc felt like a family. the founders early on were mostly young. we all had dinner together once a week cooked for the first couple years by me. our first building had been a private home. the overall atmosphere was shockingly different from a vcs office on sand hill road in a way that was entirely for the better. there was an authenticity that everyone who walked in could sense. and that didnt just mean that people trusted us. it was the perfect quality to instill in startups. authenticity is one of the most important things yc looks for in founders not just because fakers and opportunists are annoying but because authenticity is one of the main things that separates the most successful startups from the rest.early yc was a family and jessica was its mom. and the culture she defined was one of ycs most important innovations. culture is important in any organization but at yc culture wasnt just how we behaved when we built the product. at yc the culture was the product.jessica was also the mom in another sense she had the last word. everything we did as an organization went through her first  who to fund what to say to the public how to deal with other companies who to hire everything.before we had kids yc was more or less our life. there was no real distinction between working hours and not. we talked about yc all the time. and while there might be some businesses that it would be tedious to let infect your private life we liked it. wed started yc because it was something we were interested in. and some of the problems we were trying to solve were endlessly difficult. how do you recognize good founders you could talk about that for years and we did we still do.im better at some things than jessica and shes better at some things than me. one of the things shes best at is judging people. shes one of those rare individuals with xray vision for character. she can see through any kind of faker almost immediately. her nickname within yc was the social radar and this special power of hers was critical in making yc what it is. the earlier you pick startups the more youre picking the founders. later stage investors get to try products and look at growth numbers. at the stage where yc invests there is often neither a product nor any numbers.others thought yc had some special insight about the future of technology. mostly we had the same sort of insight socrates claimed we at least knew we knew nothing. what made yc successful was being able to pick good founders. we thought airbnb was a bad idea. we funded it because we liked the founders.during interviews robert and trevor and i would pepper the applicants with technical questions. jessica would mostly watch. a lot of the applicants probably read her as some kind of secretary especially early on because she was the one whod go out and get each new group and she didnt ask many questions. she was ok with that. it was easier for her to watch people if they didnt notice her. but after the interview the three of us would turn to jessica and ask what does the social radar say 1having the social radar at interviews wasnt just how we picked founders whod be successful. it was also how we picked founders who were good people. at first we did this because we couldnt help it. imagine what it would feel like to have xray vision for character. being around bad people would be intolerable. so wed refuse to fund founders whose characters we had doubts about even if we thought theyd be successful.though we initially did this out of selfindulgence it turned out to be very valuable to yc. we didnt realize it in the beginning but the people we were picking would become the yc alumni network. and once we picked them unless they did something really egregious they were going to be part of it for life. some now think ycs alumni network is its most valuable feature. i personally think ycs advice is pretty good too but the alumni network is certainly among the most valuable features. the level of trust and helpfulness is remarkable for a group of such size. and jessica is the main reason why.as we later learned it probably cost us little to reject people whose characters we had doubts about because how good founders are and how well they do are not orthogonal. if bad founders succeed at all they tend to sell early. the most successful founders are almost all good.if jessica was so important to yc why dont more people realize it partly because im a writer and writers always get disproportionate attention. ycs brand was initially my brand and our applicants were people whod read my essays. but there is another reason jessica hates attention. talking to reporters makes her nervous. the thought of giving a talk paralyzes her. she was even uncomfortable at our wedding because the bride is always the center of attention. 2its not just because shes shy that she hates attention but because it throws off the social radar. she cant be herself. you cant watch people when everyone is watching you.another reason attention worries her is that she hates bragging. in anything she does thats publicly visible her biggest fear after the obvious fear that it will be bad is that it will seem ostentatious. she says being too modest is a common problem for women. but in her case it goes beyond that. she has a horror of ostentation so visceral its almost a phobia.she also hates fighting. she cant do it she just shuts down. and unfortunately there is a good deal of fighting in being the public face of an organization.so although jessica more than anyone made yc unique the very qualities that enabled her to do it mean she tends to get written out of ycs history. everyone buys this story that pg started yc and his wife just kind of helped. even ycs haters buy it. a couple years ago when people were attacking us for not funding more female founders than exist they all treated yc as identical with pg. it would have spoiled the narrative to acknowledge jessicas central role at yc.jessica was boiling mad that people were accusing her company of sexism. ive never seen her angrier about anything. but she did not contradict them. not publicly. in private there was a great deal of profanity. and she wrote three separate essays about the question of female founders. but she could never bring herself to publish any of them. shed seen the level of vitriol in this debate and she shrank from engaging. 3it wasnt just because she disliked fighting. shes so sensitive to character that it repels her even to fight with dishonest people. the idea of mixing it up with linkbait journalists or twitter trolls would seem to her not merely frightening but disgusting.but jessica knew her example as a successful female founder would encourage more women to start companies so last year she did something yc had never done before and hired a pr firm to get her some interviews. at one of the first she did the reporter brushed aside her insights about startups and turned it into a sensationalistic story about how some guy had tried to chat her up as she was waiting outside the bar where they had arranged to meet. jessica was mortified partly because the guy had done nothing wrong but more because the story treated her as a victim significant only for being a woman rather than one of the most knowledgeable investors in the valley.after that she told the pr firm to stop.youre not going to be hearing in the press about what jessica has achieved. so let me tell you what jessica has achieved. y combinator is fundamentally a nexus of people like a university. it doesnt make a product. what defines it is the people. jessica more than anyone curated and nurtured that collection of people. in that sense she literally made yc.jessica knows more about the qualities of startup founders than anyone else ever has. her immense data set and xray vision are the perfect storm in that respect. the qualities of the founders are the best predictor of how a startup will do. and startups are in turn the most important source of growth in mature economies.the person who knows the most about the most important factor in the growth of mature economies  that is who jessica livingston is. doesnt that sound like someone who should be better knownnotes1 harj taggar reminded me that while jessica didnt ask many questions they tended to be important onesshe was always good at sniffing out any red flags about the team or their determination and disarmingly asking the right question which usually revealed more than the founders realized.2 or more precisely while she likes getting attention in the sense of getting credit for what she has done she doesnt like getting attention in the sense of being watched in real time. unfortunately not just for her but for a lot of people how much you get of the former depends a lot on how much you get of the latter.incidentally if you saw jessica at a public event you would never guess she hates attention because a she is very polite and b when shes nervous she expresses it by smiling more.3 the existence of people like jessica is not just something the mainstream media needs to learn to acknowledge but something feminists need to learn to acknowledge as well. there are successful women who dont like to fight. which means if the public conversation about women consists of fighting their voices will be silenced.theres a sort of greshams law of conversations. if a conversation reaches a certain level of incivility the more thoughtful people start to leave. no one understands female founders better than jessica. but its unlikely anyone will ever hear her speak candidly about the topic. she ventured a toe in that water a while ago and the reaction was so violent that she decided never again.

kate courteau is the architect who designed y combinators office. recently we managed to recruit her to help us run yc when shes not busy with architectural projects. though shed heard a lot about yc since the beginning the last 9 months have been a total immersion.ive been around the startup world for so long that it seems normal to me so i was curious to hear what had surprised her most about it. this was her list1. how many startups fail.kate knew in principle that startups were very risky but she was surprised to see how constant the threat of failure was  not just for the minnows but even for the famous startups whose founders came to speak at yc dinners.2. how much startups ideas change.as usual by demo day about half the startups were doing something significantly different than they started with. we encourage that. starting a startup is like science in that you have to follow the truth wherever it leads. in the rest of the world people dont start things till theyre sure what they want to do and once started they tend to continue on their initial path even if its mistaken.3. how little money it can take to start a startup.in kates world everything is still physical and expensive. you can barely renovate a bathroom for the cost of starting a startup.4. how scrappy founders are.that was her actual word. i agree with her but till she mentioned this it never occurred to me how little this quality is appreciated in most of the rest of the world. it wouldnt be a compliment in most organizations to call someone scrappy.what does it mean exactly its basically the diminutive form of belligerent. someone whos scrappy manages to be both threatening and undignified at the same time. which seems to me exactly what one would want to be in any kind of work. if youre not threatening youre probably not doing anything new and dignity is merely a sort of plaque.5. how techsaturated silicon valley is.it seems like everybody here is in the industry. that isnt literally true but there is a qualitative difference between silicon valley and other places. you tend to keep your voice down because theres a good chance the person at the next table would know some of the people youre talking about. i never felt that in boston. the good news is theres also a good chance the person at the next table could help you in some way.6. that the speakers at yc were so consistent in their advice.actually ive noticed this too. i always worry the speakers will put us in an embarrassing position by contradicting what we tell the startups but it happens surprisingly rarely.when i asked her what specific things she remembered speakers always saying she mentioned that the way to succeed was to launch something fast listen to users and then iterate that startups required resilience because they were always an emotional rollercoaster and that most vcs were sheep.ive been impressed by how consistently the speakers advocate launching fast and iterating. that was contrarian advice 10 years ago but its clearly now the established practice.7. how casual successful startup founders are.most of the famous founders in silicon valley are people youd overlook on the street. its not merely that they dont dress up. they dont project any kind of aura of power either. theyre not trying to impress anyone.interestingly while kate said that she could never pick out successful founders she could recognize vcs both by the way they dressed and the way they carried themselves.8. how important it is for founders to have people to ask for advice.i swear i didnt prompt this one. without advice theyd just be sort of lost. fortunately there are a lot of people to help them. theres a strong tradition within yc of helping other ycfunded startups. but we didnt invent that idea its just a slightly more concentrated form of existing valley culture.9. what a solitary task startups are.architects are constantly interacting face to face with other people whereas doing a technology startup at least tends to require long stretches of uninterrupted time to work. you could do it in a box.by inverting this list we can get a portrait of the normal world. its populated by people who talk a lot with one another as they work slowly but harmoniously on conservative expensive projects whose destinations are decided in advance and who carefully adjust their manner to reflect their position in the hierarchy.thats also a fairly accurate description of the past. so startup culture may not merely be different in the way youd expect any subculture to be but a leading indicator.

before i had kids i was afraid of having kids. up to that point i felt about kids the way the young augustine felt about living virtuously. id have been sad to think id never have children. but did i want them now no.if i had kids id become a parent and parents as id known since i was a kid were uncool. they were dull and responsible and had no fun. and while its not surprising that kids would believe that to be honest i hadnt seen much as an adult to change my mind. whenever id noticed parents with kids the kids seemed to be terrors and the parents pathetic harried creatures even when they prevailed.when people had babies i congratulated them enthusiastically because that seemed to be what one did. but i didnt feel it at all. better you than me i was thinking.now when people have babies i congratulate them enthusiastically and i mean it. especially the first one. i feel like they just got the best gift in the world.what changed of course is that i had kids. something i dreaded turned out to be wonderful.partly and i wont deny it this is because of serious chemical changes that happened almost instantly when our first child was born. it was like someone flipped a switch. i suddenly felt protective not just toward our child but toward all children. as i was driving my wife and new son home from the hospital i approached a crosswalk full of pedestrians and i found myself thinking i have to be really careful of all these people. every one of them is someones childso to some extent you cant trust me when i say having kids is great. to some extent im like a religious cultist telling you that youll be happy if you join the cult too  but only because joining the cult will alter your mind in a way that will make you happy to be a cult member.but not entirely. there were some things about having kids that i clearly got wrong before i had them.for example there was a huge amount of selection bias in my observations of parents and children. some parents may have noticed that i wrote whenever id noticed parents with kids. of course the times i noticed kids were when things were going wrong. i only noticed them when they made noise. and where was i when i noticed them ordinarily i never went to places with kids so the only times i encountered them were in shared bottlenecks like airplanes. which is not exactly a representative sample. flying with a toddler is something very few parents enjoy.what i didnt notice because they tend to be much quieter were all the great moments parents had with kids. people dont talk about these much  the magic is hard to put into words and all other parents know about them anyway  but one of the great things about having kids is that there are so many times when you feel there is nowhere else youd rather be and nothing else youd rather be doing. you dont have to be doing anything special. you could just be going somewhere together or putting them to bed or pushing them on the swings at the park. but you wouldnt trade these moments for anything. one doesnt tend to associate kids with peace but thats what you feel. you dont need to look any further than where you are right now.before i had kids i had moments of this kind of peace but they were rarer. with kids it can happen several times a day.my other source of data about kids was my own childhood and that was similarly misleading. i was pretty bad and was always in trouble for something or other. so it seemed to me that parenthood was essentially law enforcement. i didnt realize there were good times too.i remember my mother telling me once when i was about 30 that shed really enjoyed having me and my sister. my god i thought this woman is a saint. she not only endured all the pain we subjected her to but actually enjoyed it now i realize she was simply telling the truth.she said that one reason she liked having us was that wed been interesting to talk to. that took me by surprise when i had kids. you dont just love them. they become your friends too. theyre really interesting. and while i admit small children are disastrously fond of repetition anything worth doing once is worth doing fifty times its often genuinely fun to play with them. that surprised me too. playing with a 2 year old was fun when i was 2 and definitely not fun when i was 6. why would it become fun again later but it does.there are of course times that are pure drudgery. or worse still terror. having kids is one of those intense types of experience that are hard to imagine unless youve had them. but it is not as i implicitly believed before having kids simply your dna heading for the lifeboats.some of my worries about having kids were right though. they definitely make you less productive. i know having kids makes some people get their act together but if your act was already together youre going to have less time to do it in. in particular youre going to have to work to a schedule. kids have schedules. im not sure if its because thats how kids are or because its the only way to integrate their lives with adults but once you have kids you tend to have to work on their schedule.you will have chunks of time to work. but you cant let work spill promiscuously through your whole life like i used to before i had kids. youre going to have to work at the same time every day whether inspiration is flowing or not and there are going to be times when you have to stop even if it is.ive been able to adapt to working this way. work like love finds a way. if there are only certain times it can happen it happens at those times. so while i dont get as much done as before i had kids i get enough done.i hate to say this because being ambitious has always been a part of my identity but having kids may make one less ambitious. it hurts to see that sentence written down. i squirm to avoid it. but if there werent something real there why would i squirm the fact is once you have kids youre probably going to care more about them than you do about yourself. and attention is a zerosum game. only one idea at a time can be the top idea in your mind. once you have kids it will often be your kids and that means it will less often be some project youre working on.i have some hacks for sailing close to this wind. for example when i write essays i think about what id want my kids to know. that drives me to get things right. and when i was writing bel i told my kids that once i finished it id take them to africa. when you say that sort of thing to a little kid they treat it as a promise. which meant i had to finish or id be taking away their trip to africa. maybe if im really lucky such tricks could put me net ahead. but the wind is there no question.on the other hand what kind of wimpy ambition do you have if it wont survive having kids do you have so little to spareand while having kids may be warping my present judgement it hasnt overwritten my memory. i remember perfectly well what life was like before. well enough to miss some things a lot like the ability to take off for some other country at a moments notice. that was so great. why did i never do thatsee what i did there the fact is most of the freedom i had before kids i never used. i paid for it in loneliness but i never used it.i had plenty of happy times before i had kids. but if i count up happy moments not just potential happiness but actual happy moments there are more after kids than before. now i practically have it on tap almost any bedtime.peoples experiences as parents vary a lot and i know ive been lucky. but i think the worries i had before having kids must be pretty common and judging by other parents faces when they see their kids so must the happiness that kids bring.

ive read villehardouins chronicle of the fourth crusade at least two times maybe three. and yet if i had to write down everything i remember from it i doubt it would amount to much more than a page. multiply this times several hundred and i get an uneasy feeling when i look at my bookshelves. what use is it to read all these books if i remember so little from thema few months ago as i was reading constance reids excellent biography of hilbert i figured out if not the answer to this question at least something that made me feel better about it. she writeshilbert had no patience with mathematical lectures which filled the students with facts but did not teach them how to frame a problem and solve it. he often used to tell them that a perfect formulation of a problem is already half its solution.that has always seemed to me an important point and i was even more convinced of it after hearing it confirmed by hilbert.but how had i come to believe in this idea in the first place a combination of my own experience and other things id read. none of which i could at that moment remember and eventually id forget that hilbert had confirmed it too. but my increased belief in the importance of this idea would remain something id learned from this book even after id forgotten id learned it.reading and experience train your model of the world. and even if you forget the experience or what you read its effect on your model of the world persists. your mind is like a compiled program youve lost the source of. it works but you dont know why.the place to look for what i learned from villehardouins chronicle is not what i remember from it but my mental models of the crusades venice medieval culture siege warfare and so on. which doesnt mean i couldnt have read more attentively but at least the harvest of reading is not so miserably small as it might seem.this is one of those things that seem obvious in retrospect. but it was a surprise to me and presumably would be to anyone else who felt uneasy about apparently forgetting so much theyd read.realizing it does more than make you feel a little better about forgetting though. there are specific implications.for example reading and experience are usually compiled at the time they happen using the state of your brain at that time. the same book would get compiled differently at different points in your life. which means it is very much worth reading important books multiple times. i always used to feel some misgivings about rereading books. i unconsciously lumped reading together with work like carpentry where having to do something again is a sign you did it wrong the first time. whereas now the phrase already read seems almost illformed.intriguingly this implication isnt limited to books. technology will increasingly make it possible to relive our experiences. when people do that today its usually to enjoy them again e.g. when looking at pictures of a trip or to find the origin of some bug in their compiled code e.g. when stephen fry succeeded in remembering the childhood trauma that prevented him from singing. but as technologies for recording and playing back your life improve it may become common for people to relive experiences without any goal in mind simply to learn from them again as one might when rereading a book.eventually we may be able not just to play back experiences but also to index and even edit them. so although not knowing how you know things may seem part of being human it may not be.

the most damaging thing you learned in school wasnt something you learned in any specific class. it was learning to get good grades.when i was in college a particularly earnest philosophy grad student once told me that he never cared what grade he got in a class only what he learned in it. this stuck in my mind because it was the only time i ever heard anyone say such a thing.for me as for most students the measurement of what i was learning completely dominated actual learning in college. i was fairly earnest i was genuinely interested in most of the classes i took and i worked hard. and yet i worked by far the hardest when i was studying for a test.in theory tests are merely what their name implies tests of what youve learned in the class. in theory you shouldnt have to prepare for a test in a class any more than you have to prepare for a blood test. in theory you learn from taking the class from going to the lectures and doing the reading andor assignments and the test that comes afterward merely measures how well you learned.in practice as almost everyone reading this will know things are so different that hearing this explanation of how classes and tests are meant to work is like hearing the etymology of a word whose meaning has changed completely. in practice the phrase studying for a test was almost redundant because that was when one really studied. the difference between diligent and slack students was that the former studied hard for tests and the latter didnt. no one was pulling allnighters two weeks into the semester.even though i was a diligent student almost all the work i did in school was aimed at getting a good grade on something.to many people it would seem strange that the preceding sentence has a though in it. arent i merely stating a tautology isnt that what a diligent student is a straighta student thats how deeply the conflation of learning with grades has infused our culture.is it so bad if learning is conflated with grades yes it is bad. and it wasnt till decades after college when i was running y combinator that i realized how bad it is.i knew of course when i was a student that studying for a test is far from identical with actual learning. at the very least you dont retain knowledge you cram into your head the night before an exam. but the problem is worse than that. the real problem is that most tests dont come close to measuring what theyre supposed to.if tests truly were tests of learning things wouldnt be so bad. getting good grades and learning would converge just a little late. the problem is that nearly all tests given to students are terribly hackable. most people whove gotten good grades know this and know it so well theyve ceased even to question it. youll see when you realize how naive it sounds to act otherwise.suppose youre taking a class on medieval history and the final exam is coming up. the final exam is supposed to be a test of your knowledge of medieval history right so if you have a couple days between now and the exam surely the best way to spend the time if you want to do well on the exam is to read the best books you can find about medieval history. then youll know a lot about it and do well on the exam.no no no experienced students are saying to themselves. if you merely read good books on medieval history most of the stuff you learned wouldnt be on the test. its not good books you want to read but the lecture notes and assigned reading in this class. and even most of that you can ignore because you only have to worry about the sort of thing that could turn up as a test question. youre looking for sharplydefined chunks of information. if one of the assigned readings has an interesting digression on some subtle point you can safely ignore that because its not the sort of thing that could be turned into a test question. but if the professor tells you that there were three underlying causes of the schism of 1378 or three main consequences of the black death youd better know them. and whether they were in fact the causes or consequences is beside the point. for the purposes of this class they are.at a university there are often copies of old exams floating around and these narrow still further what you have to learn. as well as learning what kind of questions this professor asks youll often get actual exam questions. many professors reuse them. after teaching a class for 10 years it would be hard not to at least inadvertently.in some classes your professor will have had some sort of political axe to grind and if so youll have to grind it too. the need for this varies. in classes in math or the hard sciences or engineering its rarely necessary but at the other end of the spectrum there are classes where you couldnt get a good grade without it.getting a good grade in a class on x is so different from learning a lot about x that you have to choose one or the other and you cant blame students if they choose grades. everyone judges them by their grades  graduate programs employers scholarships even their own parents.i liked learning and i really enjoyed some of the papers and programs i wrote in college. but did i ever after turning in a paper in some class sit down and write another just for fun of course not. i had things due in other classes. if it ever came to a choice of learning or grades i chose grades. i hadnt come to college to do badly.anyone who cares about getting good grades has to play this game or theyll be surpassed by those who do. and at elite universities that means nearly everyone since someone who didnt care about getting good grades probably wouldnt be there in the first place. the result is that students compete to maximize the difference between learning and getting good grades.why are tests so bad more precisely why are they so hackable any experienced programmer could answer that. how hackable is software whose author hasnt paid any attention to preventing it from being hacked usually its as porous as a colander.hackable is the default for any test imposed by an authority. the reason the tests youre given are so consistently bad  so consistently far from measuring what theyre supposed to measure  is simply that the people creating them havent made much effort to prevent them from being hacked.but you cant blame teachers if their tests are hackable. their job is to teach not to create unhackable tests. the real problem is grades or more precisely that grades have been overloaded. if grades were merely a way for teachers to tell students what they were doing right and wrong like a coach giving advice to an athlete students wouldnt be tempted to hack tests. but unfortunately after a certain age grades become more than advice. after a certain age whenever youre being taught youre usually also being judged.ive used college tests as an example but those are actually the least hackable. all the tests most students take their whole lives are at least as bad including most spectacularly of all the test that gets them into college. if getting into college were merely a matter of having the quality of ones mind measured by admissions officers the way scientists measure the mass of an object we could tell teenage kids learn a lot and leave it at that. you can tell how bad college admissions are as a test from how unlike high school that sounds. in practice the freakishly specific nature of the stuff ambitious kids have to do in high school is directly proportionate to the hackability of college admissions. the classes you dont care about that are mostly memorization the random extracurricular activities you have to participate in to show youre wellrounded the standardized tests as artificial as chess the essay you have to write thats presumably meant to hit some very specific target but youre not told what.as well as being bad in what it does to kids this test is also bad in the sense of being very hackable. so hackable that whole industries have grown up to hack it. this is the explicit purpose of testprep companies and admissions counsellors but its also a significant part of the function of private schools.why is this particular test so hackable i think because of what its measuring. although the popular story is that the way to get into a good college is to be really smart admissions officers at elite colleges neither are nor claim to be looking only for that. what are they looking for theyre looking for people who are not simply smart but admirable in some more general sense. and how is this more general admirableness measured the admissions officers feel it. in other words they accept who they like.so what college admissions is a test of is whether you suit the taste of some group of people. well of course a test like that is going to be hackable. and because its both very hackable and theres thought to be a lot at stake its hacked like nothing else. thats why it distorts your life so much for so long.its no wonder high school students often feel alienated. the shape of their lives is completely artificial.but wasting your time is not the worst thing the educational system does to you. the worst thing it does is to train you that the way to win is by hacking bad tests. this is a much subtler problem that i didnt recognize until i saw it happening to other people.when i started advising startup founders at y combinator especially young ones i was puzzled by the way they always seemed to make things overcomplicated. how they would ask do you raise money whats the trick for making venture capitalists want to invest in you the best way to make vcs want to invest in you i would explain is to actually be a good investment. even if you could trick vcs into investing in a bad startup youd be tricking yourselves too. youre investing time in the same company youre asking them to invest money in. if its not a good investment why are you even doing itoh theyd say and then after a pause to digest this revelation theyd ask what makes a startup a good investmentso i would explain that what makes a startup promising not just in the eyes of investors but in fact is growth. ideally in revenue but failing that in usage. what they needed to do was get lots of users.how does one get lots of users they had all kinds of ideas about that. they needed to do a big launch that would get them exposure. they needed influential people to talk about them. they even knew they needed to launch on a tuesday because thats when one gets the most attention.no i would explain that is not how to get lots of users. the way you get lots of users is to make the product really great. then people will not only use it but recommend it to their friends so your growth will be exponential once you get it started.at this point ive told the founders something youd think would be completely obvious that they should make a good company by making a good product. and yet their reaction would be something like the reaction many physicists must have had when they first heard about the theory of relativity a mixture of astonishment at its apparent genius combined with a suspicion that anything so weird couldnt possibly be right. ok they would say dutifully. and could you introduce us to suchandsuch influential person and remember we want to launch on tuesday.it would sometimes take founders years to grasp these simple lessons. and not because they were lazy or stupid. they just seemed blind to what was right in front of them.why i would ask myself do they always make things so complicated and then one day i realized this was not a rhetorical question.why did founders tie themselves in knots doing the wrong things when the answer was right in front of them because that was what theyd been trained to do. their education had taught them that the way to win was to hack the test. and without even telling them they were being trained to do this. the younger ones the recent graduates had never faced a nonartificial test. they thought this was just how the world worked that the first thing you did when facing any kind of challenge was to figure out what the trick was for hacking the test. thats why the conversation would always start with how to raise money because that read as the test. it came at the end of yc. it had numbers attached to it and higher numbers seemed to be better. it must be the test.there are certainly big chunks of the world where the way to win is to hack the test. this phenomenon isnt limited to schools. and some people either due to ideology or ignorance claim that this is true of startups too. but it isnt. in fact one of the most striking things about startups is the degree to which you win by simply doing good work. there are edge cases as there are in anything but in general you win by getting users and what users care about is whether the product does what they want.why did it take me so long to understand why founders made startups overcomplicated because i hadnt realized explicitly that schools train us to win by hacking bad tests. and not just them but me id been trained to hack bad tests too and hadnt realized it till decades later.i had lived as if i realized it but without knowing why. for example i had avoided working for big companies. but if youd asked why id have said it was because they were bogus or bureaucratic. or just yuck. i never understood how much of my dislike of big companies was due to the fact that you win by hacking bad tests.similarly the fact that the tests were unhackable was a lot of what attracted me to startups. but again i hadnt realized that explicitly.i had in effect achieved by successive approximations something that may have a closedform solution. i had gradually undone my training in hacking bad tests without knowing i was doing it. could someone coming out of school banish this demon just by knowing its name and saying begone it seems worth trying.merely talking explicitly about this phenomenon is likely to make things better because much of its power comes from the fact that we take it for granted. after youve noticed it it seems the elephant in the room but its a pretty well camouflaged elephant. the phenomenon is so old and so pervasive. and its simply the result of neglect. no one meant things to be this way. this is just what happens when you combine learning with grades competition and the naive assumption of unhackability.it was mindblowing to realize that two of the things id puzzled about the most  the bogusness of high school and the difficulty of getting founders to see the obvious  both had the same cause. its rare for such a big block to slide into place so late.usually when that happens it has implications in a lot of different areas and this case seems no exception. for example it suggests both that education could be done better and how you might fix it. but it also suggests a potential answer to the question all big companies seem to have how can we be more like a startup im not going to chase down all the implications now. what i want to focus on here is what it means for individuals.to start with it means that most ambitious kids graduating from college have something they may want to unlearn. but it also changes how you look at the world. instead of looking at all the different kinds of work people do and thinking of them vaguely as more or less appealing you can now ask a very specific question that will sort them in an interesting way to what extent do you win at this kind of work by hacking bad testsit would help if there was a way to recognize bad tests quickly. is there a pattern here it turns out there is.tests can be divided into two kinds those that are imposed by authorities and those that arent. tests that arent imposed by authorities are inherently unhackable in the sense that no one is claiming theyre tests of anything more than they actually test. a football match for example is simply a test of who wins not which team is better. you can tell that from the fact that commentators sometimes say afterward that the better team won. whereas tests imposed by authorities are usually proxies for something else. a test in a class is supposed to measure not just how well you did on that particular test but how much you learned in the class. while tests that arent imposed by authorities are inherently unhackable those imposed by authorities have to be made unhackable. usually they arent. so as a first approximation bad tests are roughly equivalent to tests imposed by authorities.you might actually like to win by hacking bad tests. presumably some people do. but i bet most people who find themselves doing this kind of work dont like it. they just take it for granted that this is how the world works unless you want to drop out and be some kind of hippie artisan.i suspect many people implicitly assume that working in a field with bad tests is the price of making lots of money. but that i can tell you is false. it used to be true. in the midtwentieth century when the economy was composed of oligopolies the only way to the top was by playing their game. but its not true now. there are now ways to get rich by doing good work and thats part of the reason people are so much more excited about getting rich than they used to be. when i was a kid you could either become an engineer and make cool things or make lots of money by becoming an executive. now you can make lots of money by making cool things.hacking bad tests is becoming less important as the link between work and authority erodes. the erosion of that link is one of the most important trends happening now and we see its effects in almost every kind of work people do. startups are one of the most visible examples but we see much the same thing in writing. writers no longer have to submit to publishers and editors to reach readers now they can go direct.the more i think about this question the more optimistic i get. this seems one of those situations where we dont realize how much something was holding us back until its eliminated. and i can foresee the whole bogus edifice crumbling. imagine what happens as more and more people start to ask themselves if they want to win by hacking bad tests and decide that they dont. the kinds of work where you win by hacking bad tests will be starved of talent and the kinds where you win by doing good work will see an influx of the most ambitious people. and as hacking bad tests shrinks in importance education will evolve to stop training us to do it. imagine what the world could look like if that happened.this is not just a lesson for individuals to unlearn but one for society to unlearn and well be amazed at the energy thats liberated when we do.notes1 if using tests only to measure learning sounds impossibly utopian that is already the way things work at lambda school. lambda school doesnt have grades. you either graduate or you dont. the only purpose of tests is to decide at each stage of the curriculum whether you can continue to the next. so in effect the whole school is passfail.2 if the final exam consisted of a long conversation with the professor you could prepare for it by reading good books on medieval history. a lot of the hackability of tests in schools is due to the fact that the same test has to be given to large numbers of students.3 learning is the naive algorithm for getting good grades.4 hacking has multiple senses. theres a narrow sense in which it means to compromise something. thats the sense in which one hacks a bad test. but theres another more general sense meaning to find a surprising solution to a problem often by thinking differently about it. hacking in this sense is a wonderful thing. and indeed some of the hacks people use on bad tests are impressively ingenious the problem is not so much the hacking as that because the tests are hackable they dont test what theyre meant to.5 the people who pick startups at y combinator are similar to admissions officers except that instead of being arbitrary their acceptance criteria are trained by a very tight feedback loop. if you accept a bad startup or reject a good one you will usually know it within a year or two at the latest and often within a month.6 im sure admissions officers are tired of reading applications from kids who seem to have no personality beyond being willing to seem however theyre supposed to seem to get accepted. what they dont realize is that they are in a sense looking in a mirror. the lack of authenticity in the applicants is a reflection of the arbitrariness of the application process. a dictator might just as well complain about the lack of authenticity in the people around him.7 by good work i dont mean morally good but good in the sense in which a good craftsman does good work.8 there are borderline cases where its hard to say which category a test falls in. for example is raising venture capital like college admissions or is it like selling to a customer9 note that a good test is merely one thats unhackable. good here doesnt mean morally good but good in the sense of working well. the difference between fields with bad tests and good ones is not that the former are bad and the latter are good but that the former are bogus and the latter arent. but those two measures are not unrelated. as tara ploughman said the path from good to evil goes through bogus.10 people who think the recent increase in economic inequality is due to changes in tax policy seem very naive to anyone with experience in startups. different people are getting rich now than used to and theyre getting much richer than mere tax savings could make them.11 note to tiger parents you may think youre training your kids to win but if youre training them to win by hacking bad tests you are as parents so often do training them to fight the last war.

adults lie constantly to kids. im not saying we should stop but i think we should at least examine which lies we tell and why.there may also be a benefit to us. we were all lied to as kids and some of the lies we were told still affect us. so by studying the ways adults lie to kids we may be able to clear our heads of lies we were told.im using the word lie in a very general sense not just overt falsehoods but also all the more subtle ways we mislead kids. though lie has negative connotations i dont mean to suggest we should never do thisjust that we should pay attention when we do. 1one of the most remarkable things about the way we lie to kids is how broad the conspiracy is. all adults know what their culture lies to kids about theyre the questions you answer ask your parents. if a kid asked who won the world series in 1982 or what the atomic weight of carbon was you could just tell him. but if a kid asks you is there a god or whats a prostitute youll probably say ask your parents.since we all agree kids see few cracks in the view of the world presented to them. the biggest disagreements are between parents and schools but even those are small. schools are careful what they say about controversial topics and if they do contradict what parents want their kids to believe parents either pressure the school into keeping quiet or move their kids to a new school.the conspiracy is so thorough that most kids who discover it do so only by discovering internal contradictions in what theyre told. it can be traumatic for the ones who wake up during the operation. heres what happened to einsteinthrough the reading of popular scientific books i soon reached the conviction that much in the stories of the bible could not be true. the consequence was a positively fanatic freethinking coupled with the impression that youth is intentionally being deceived by the state through lies it was a crushing impression. 2i remember that feeling. by 15 i was convinced the world was corrupt from end to end. thats why movies like the matrix have such resonance. every kid grows up in a fake world. in a way it would be easier if the forces behind it were as clearly differentiated as a bunch of evil machines and one could make a clean break just by taking a pill.protectionif you ask adults why they lie to kids the most common reason they give is to protect them. and kids do need protecting. the environment you want to create for a newborn child will be quite unlike the streets of a big city.that seems so obvious it seems wrong to call it a lie. its certainly not a bad lie to tell to give a baby the impression the world is quiet and warm and safe. but this harmless type of lie can turn sour if left unexamined.imagine if you tried to keep someone in as protected an environment as a newborn till age 18. to mislead someone so grossly about the world would seem not protection but abuse. thats an extreme example of course when parents do that sort of thing it becomes national news. but you see the same problem on a smaller scale in the malaise teenagers feel in suburbia.the main purpose of suburbia is to provide a protected environment for children to grow up in. and it seems great for 10 year olds. i liked living in suburbia when i was 10. i didnt notice how sterile it was. my whole world was no bigger than a few friends houses i bicycled to and some woods i ran around in. on a log scale i was midway between crib and globe. a suburban street was just the right size. but as i grew older suburbia started to feel suffocatingly fake.life can be pretty good at 10 or 20 but its often frustrating at 15. this is too big a problem to solve here but certainly one reason life sucks at 15 is that kids are trapped in a world designed for 10 year olds.what do parents hope to protect their children from by raising them in suburbia a friend who moved out of manhattan said merely that her 3 year old daughter saw too much. off the top of my head that might include people who are high or drunk poverty madness gruesome medical conditions sexual behavior of various degrees of oddness and violent anger.i think its the anger that would worry me most if i had a 3 year old. i was 29 when i moved to new york and i was surprised even then. i wouldnt want a 3 year old to see some of the disputes i saw. it would be too frightening. a lot of the things adults conceal from smaller children they conceal because theyd be frightening not because they want to conceal the existence of such things. misleading the child is just a byproduct.this seems one of the most justifiable types of lying adults do to kids. but because the lies are indirect we dont keep a very strict accounting of them. parents know theyve concealed the facts about sex and many at some point sit their kids down and explain more. but few tell their kids about the differences between the real world and the cocoon they grew up in. combine this with the confidence parents try to instill in their kids and every year you get a new crop of 18 year olds who think they know how to run the world.dont all 18 year olds think they know how to run the world actually this seems to be a recent innovation no more than about 100 years old. in preindustrial times teenage kids were junior members of the adult world and comparatively well aware of their shortcomings. they could see they werent as strong or skillful as the village smith. in past times people lied to kids about some things more than we do now but the lies implicit in an artificial protected environment are a recent invention. like a lot of new inventions the rich got this first. children of kings and great magnates were the first to grow up out of touch with the world. suburbia means half the population can live like kings in that respect.sex and drugsid have different worries about raising teenage kids in new york. id worry less about what theyd see and more about what theyd do. i went to college with a lot of kids who grew up in manhattan and as a rule they seemed pretty jaded. they seemed to have lost their virginity at an average of about 14 and by college had tried more drugs than id even heard of.the reasons parents dont want their teenage kids having sex are complex. there are some obvious dangers pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. but those arent the only reasons parents dont want their kids having sex. the average parents of a 14 year old girl would hate the idea of her having sex even if there were zero risk of pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases.kids can probably sense they arent being told the whole story. after all pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases are just as much a problem for adults and they have sex.what really bothers parents about their teenage kids having sex their dislike of the idea is so visceral its probably inborn. but if its inborn it should be universal and there are plenty of societies where parents dont mind if their teenage kids have sexindeed where its normal for 14 year olds to become mothers. so whats going on there does seem to be a universal taboo against sex with prepubescent children. one can imagine evolutionary reasons for that. and i think this is the main reason parents in industrialized societies dislike teenage kids having sex. they still think of them as children even though biologically theyre not so the taboo against child sex still has force.one thing adults conceal about sex they also conceal about drugs that it can cause great pleasure. thats what makes sex and drugs so dangerous. the desire for them can cloud ones judgementwhich is especially frightening when the judgement being clouded is the already wretched judgement of a teenage kid.here parents desires conflict. older societies told kids they had bad judgement but modern parents want their children to be confident. this may well be a better plan than the old one of putting them in their place but it has the side effect that after having implicitly lied to kids about how good their judgement is we then have to lie again about all the things they might get into trouble with if they believed us.if parents told their kids the truth about sex and drugs it would be the reason you should avoid these things is that you have lousy judgement. people with twice your experience still get burned by them. but this may be one of those cases where the truth wouldnt be convincing because one of the symptoms of bad judgement is believing you have good judgement. when youre too weak to lift something you can tell but when youre making a decision impetuously youre all the more sure of it.innocenceanother reason parents dont want their kids having sex is that they want to keep them innocent. adults have a certain model of how kids are supposed to behave and its different from what they expect of other adults.one of the most obvious differences is the words kids are allowed to use. most parents use words when talking to other adults that they wouldnt want their kids using. they try to hide even the existence of these words for as long as they can. and this is another of those conspiracies everyone participates in everyone knows youre not supposed to swear in front of kids.ive never heard more different explanations for anything parents tell kids than why they shouldnt swear. every parent i know forbids their children to swear and yet no two of them have the same justification. its clear most start with not wanting kids to swear then make up the reason afterward.so my theory about whats going on is that the function of swearwords is to mark the speaker as an adult. theres no difference in the meaning of shit and poopoo. so why should one be ok for kids to say and one forbidden the only explanation is by definition. 3why does it bother adults so much when kids do things reserved for adults the idea of a foulmouthed cynical 10 year old leaning against a lamppost with a cigarette hanging out of the corner of his mouth is very disconcerting. but whyone reason we want kids to be innocent is that were programmed to like certain kinds of helplessness. ive several times heard mothers say they deliberately refrained from correcting their young childrens mispronunciations because they were so cute. and if you think about it cuteness is helplessness. toys and cartoon characters meant to be cute always have clueless expressions and stubby ineffectual limbs.its not surprising wed have an inborn desire to love and protect helpless creatures considering human offspring are so helpless for so long. without the helplessness that makes kids cute theyd be very annoying. theyd merely seem like incompetent adults. but theres more to it than that. the reason our hypothetical jaded 10 year old bothers me so much is not just that hed be annoying but that hed have cut off his prospects for growth so early. to be jaded you have to think you know how the world works and any theory a 10 year old had about that would probably be a pretty narrow one.innocence is also openmindedness. we want kids to be innocent so they can continue to learn. paradoxical as it sounds there are some kinds of knowledge that get in the way of other kinds of knowledge. if youre going to learn that the world is a brutal place full of people trying to take advantage of one another youre better off learning it last. otherwise you wont bother learning much more.very smart adults often seem unusually innocent and i dont think this is a coincidence. i think theyve deliberately avoided learning about certain things. certainly i do. i used to think i wanted to know everything. now i know i dont.deathafter sex death is the topic adults lie most conspicuously about to kids. sex i believe they conceal because of deep taboos. but why do we conceal death from kids probably because small children are particularly horrified by it. they want to feel safe and death is the ultimate threat.one of the most spectacular lies our parents told us was about the death of our first cat. over the years as we asked for more details they were compelled to invent more so the story grew quite elaborate. the cat had died at the vets office. of what of the anaesthesia itself. why was the cat at the vets office to be fixed. and why had such a routine operation killed it it wasnt the vets fault the cat had a congenitally weak heart the anaesthesia was too much for it but there was no way anyone could have known this in advance. it was not till we were in our twenties that the truth came out my sister then about three had accidentally stepped on the cat and broken its back.they didnt feel the need to tell us the cat was now happily in cat heaven. my parents never claimed that people or animals who died had gone to a better place or that wed meet them again. it didnt seem to harm us.my grandmother told us an edited version of the death of my grandfather. she said theyd been sitting reading one day and when she said something to him he didnt answer. he seemed to be asleep but when she tried to rouse him she couldnt. he was gone. having a heart attack sounded like falling asleep. later i learned it hadnt been so neat and the heart attack had taken most of a day to kill him.along with such outright lies there must have been a lot of changing the subject when death came up. i cant remember that of course but i can infer it from the fact that i didnt really grasp i was going to die till i was about 19. how could i have missed something so obvious for so long now that ive seen parents managing the subject i can see how questions about death are gently but firmly turned aside.on this topic especially theyre met halfway by kids. kids often want to be lied to. they want to believe theyre living in a comfortable safe world as much as their parents want them to believe it. 4identitysome parents feel a strong adherence to an ethnic or religious group and want their kids to feel it too. this usually requires two different kinds of lying the first is to tell the child that he or she is an x and the second is whatever specific lies xes differentiate themselves by believing. 5telling a child they have a particular ethnic or religious identity is one of the stickiest things you can tell them. almost anything else you tell a kid they can change their mind about later when they start to think for themselves. but if you tell a kid theyre a member of a certain group that seems nearly impossible to shake.this despite the fact that it can be one of the most premeditated lies parents tell. when parents are of different religions theyll often agree between themselves that their children will be raised as xes. and it works. the kids obligingly grow up considering themselves as xes despite the fact that if their parents had chosen the other way theyd have grown up considering themselves as ys.one reason this works so well is the second kind of lie involved. the truth is common property. you cant distinguish your group by doing things that are rational and believing things that are true. if you want to set yourself apart from other people you have to do things that are arbitrary and believe things that are false. and after having spent their whole lives doing things that are arbitrary and believing things that are false and being regarded as odd by outsiders on that account the cognitive dissonance pushing children to regard themselves as xes must be enormous. if they arent an x why are they attached to all these arbitrary beliefs and customs if they arent an x why do all the nonxes call them onethis form of lie is not without its uses. you can use it to carry a payload of beneficial beliefs and they will also become part of the childs identity. you can tell the child that in addition to never wearing the color yellow believing the world was created by a giant rabbit and always snapping their fingers before eating fish xes are also particularly honest and industrious. then x children will grow up feeling its part of their identity to be honest and industrious.this probably accounts for a lot of the spread of modern religions and explains why their doctrines are a combination of the useful and the bizarre. the bizarre half is what makes the religion stick and the useful half is the payload. 6authorityone of the least excusable reasons adults lie to kids is to maintain power over them. sometimes these lies are truly sinister like a child molester telling his victims theyll get in trouble if they tell anyone what happened to them. others seem more innocent it depends how badly adults lie to maintain their power and what they use it for.most adults make some effort to conceal their flaws from children. usually their motives are mixed. for example a father who has an affair generally conceals it from his children. his motive is partly that it would worry them partly that this would introduce the topic of sex and partly a larger part than he would admit that he doesnt want to tarnish himself in their eyes.if you want to learn what lies are told to kids read almost any book written to teach them about issues. 7 peter mayle wrote one called why are we getting a divorce it begins with the three most important things to remember about divorce one of which isyou shouldnt put the blame on one parent because divorce is never only one persons fault. 8really when a man runs off with his secretary is it always partly his wifes fault but i can see why mayle might have said this. maybe its more important for kids to respect their parents than to know the truth about them.but because adults conceal their flaws and at the same time insist on high standards of behavior for kids a lot of kids grow up feeling they fall hopelessly short. they walk around feeling horribly evil for having used a swearword while in fact most of the adults around them are doing much worse things.this happens in intellectual as well as moral questions. the more confident people are the more willing they seem to be to answer a question i dont know. less confident people feel they have to have an answer or theyll look bad. my parents were pretty good about admitting when they didnt know things but i must have been told a lot of lies of this type by teachers because i rarely heard a teacher say i dont know till i got to college. i remember because it was so surprising to hear someone say that in front of a class.the first hint i had that teachers werent omniscient came in sixth grade after my father contradicted something id learned in school. when i protested that the teacher had said the opposite my father replied that the guy had no idea what he was talking aboutthat he was just an elementary school teacher after all.just a teacher the phrase seemed almost grammatically illformed. didnt teachers know everything about the subjects they taught and if not why were they the ones teaching usthe sad fact is us public school teachers dont generally understand the stuff theyre teaching very well. there are some sterling exceptions but as a rule people planning to go into teaching rank academically near the bottom of the college population. so the fact that i still thought at age 11 that teachers were infallible shows what a job the system must have done on my brain.schoolwhat kids get taught in school is a complex mix of lies. the most excusable are those told to simplify ideas to make them easy to learn. the problem is a lot of propaganda gets slipped into the curriculum in the name of simplification.public school textbooks represent a compromise between what various powerful groups want kids to be told. the lies are rarely overt. usually they consist either of omissions or of overemphasizing certain topics at the expense of others. the view of history we got in elementary school was a crude hagiography with at least one representative of each powerful group.the famous scientists i remember were einstein marie curie and george washington carver. einstein was a big deal because his work led to the atom bomb. marie curie was involved with xrays. but i was mystified about carver. he seemed to have done stuff with peanuts.its obvious now that he was on the list because he was black and for that matter that marie curie was on it because she was a woman but as a kid i was confused for years about him. i wonder if it wouldnt have been better just to tell us the truth that there werent any famous black scientists. ranking george washington carver with einstein misled us not only about science but about the obstacles blacks faced in his time.as subjects got softer the lies got more frequent. by the time you got to politics and recent history what we were taught was pretty much pure propaganda. for example we were taught to regard political leaders as saintsespecially the recently martyred kennedy and king. it was astonishing to learn later that theyd both been serial womanizers and that kennedy was a speed freak to boot. by the time kings plagiarism emerged id lost the ability to be surprised by the misdeeds of famous people.i doubt you could teach kids recent history without teaching them lies because practically everyone who has anything to say about it has some kind of spin to put on it. much recent history consists of spin. it would probably be better just to teach them metafacts like that.probably the biggest lie told in schools though is that the way to succeed is through following the rules. in fact most such rules are just hacks to manage large groups efficiently.peaceof all the reasons we lie to kids the most powerful is probably the same mundane reason they lie to us.often when we lie to people its not part of any conscious strategy but because theyd react violently to the truth. kids almost by definition lack selfcontrol. they react violently to thingsand so they get lied to a lot. 9a few thanksgivings ago a friend of mine found himself in a situation that perfectly illustrates the complex motives we have when we lie to kids. as the roast turkey appeared on the table his alarmingly perceptive 5 year old son suddenly asked if the turkey had wanted to die. foreseeing disaster my friend and his wife rapidly improvised yes the turkey had wanted to die and in fact had lived its whole life with the aim of being their thanksgiving dinner. and that phew was the end of that.whenever we lie to kids to protect them were usually also lying to keep the peace.one consequence of this sort of calming lie is that we grow up thinking horrible things are normal. its hard for us to feel a sense of urgency as adults over something weve literally been trained not to worry about. when i was about 10 i saw a documentary on pollution that put me into a panic. it seemed the planet was being irretrievably ruined. i went to my mother afterward to ask if this was so. i dont remember what she said but she made me feel better so i stopped worrying about it.that was probably the best way to handle a frightened 10 year old. but we should understand the price. this sort of lie is one of the main reasons bad things persist were all trained to ignore them.detoxa sprinter in a race almost immediately enters a state called oxygen debt. his body switches to an emergency source of energy thats faster than regular aerobic respiration. but this process builds up waste products that ultimately require extra oxygen to break down so at the end of the race he has to stop and pant for a while to recover.we arrive at adulthood with a kind of truth debt. we were told a lot of lies to get us and our parents through our childhood. some may have been necessary. some probably werent. but we all arrive at adulthood with heads full of lies.theres never a point where the adults sit you down and explain all the lies they told you. theyve forgotten most of them. so if youre going to clear these lies out of your head youre going to have to do it yourself.few do. most people go through life with bits of packing material adhering to their minds and never know it. you probably never can completely undo the effects of lies you were told as a kid but its worth trying. ive found that whenever ive been able to undo a lie i was told a lot of other things fell into place.fortunately once you arrive at adulthood you get a valuable new resource you can use to figure out what lies you were told. youre now one of the liars. you get to watch behind the scenes as adults spin the world for the next generation of kids.the first step in clearing your head is to realize how far you are from a neutral observer. when i left high school i was i thought a complete skeptic. id realized high school was crap. i thought i was ready to question everything i knew. but among the many other things i was ignorant of was how much debris there already was in my head. its not enough to consider your mind a blank slate. you have to consciously erase it.notes1 one reason i stuck with such a brutally simple word is that the lies we tell kids are probably not quite as harmless as we think. if you look at what adults told children in the past its shocking how much they lied to them. like us they did it with the best intentions. so if we think were as open as one could reasonably be with children were probably fooling ourselves. odds are people in 100 years will be as shocked at some of the lies we tell as we are at some of the lies people told 100 years ago.i cant predict which these will be and i dont want to write an essay that will seem dumb in 100 years. so instead of using special euphemisms for lies that seem excusable according to present fashions im just going to call all our lies lies.i have omitted one type lies told to play games with kids credulity. these range from makebelieve which is not really a lie because its told with a wink to the frightening lies told by older siblings. theres not much to say about these i wouldnt want the first type to go away and wouldnt expect the second type to.2 calaprice alice ed. the quotable einstein princeton university press 1996.3 if you ask parents why kids shouldnt swear the less educated ones usually reply with some questionbegging answer like its inappropriate while the more educated ones come up with elaborate rationalizations. in fact the less educated parents seem closer to the truth.4 as a friend with small children pointed out its easy for small children to consider themselves immortal because time seems to pass so slowly for them. to a 3 year old a day feels like a month might to an adult. so 80 years sounds to him like 2400 years would to us.5 i realize im going to get endless grief for classifying religion as a type of lie. usually people skirt that issue with some equivocation implying that lies believed for a sufficiently long time by sufficiently large numbers of people are immune to the usual standards for truth. but because i cant predict which lies future generations will consider inexcusable i cant safely omit any type we tell. yes it seems unlikely that religion will be out of fashion in 100 years but no more unlikely than it would have seemed to someone in 1880 that schoolchildren in 1980 would be taught that masturbation was perfectly normal and not to feel guilty about it.6 unfortunately the payload can consist of bad customs as well as good ones. for example there are certain qualities that some groups in america consider acting white. in fact most of them could as accurately be called acting japanese. theres nothing specifically white about such customs. theyre common to all cultures with long traditions of living in cities. so it is probably a losing bet for a group to consider behaving the opposite way as part of its identity.7 in this context issues basically means things were going to lie to them about. thats why theres a special name for these topics.8 mayle peter why are we getting a divorce harmony 1988.9 the ironic thing is this is also the main reason kids lie to adults. if you freak out when people tell you alarming things they wont tell you them. teenagers dont tell their parents what happened that night they were supposed to be staying at a friends house for the same reason parents dont tell 5 year olds the truth about the thanksgiving turkey. theyd freak if they knew.thanks to sam altman marc andreessen trevor blackwell patrick collison jessica livingston jackie mcdonough robert morris and david sloo for reading drafts of this. and since there are some controversial ideas here i should add that none of them agreed with everything in it.

one reason programmers dislike meetings so much is that theyre on a different type of schedule from other people. meetings cost them more.there are two types of schedule which ill call the managers schedule and the makers schedule. the managers schedule is for bosses. its embodied in the traditional appointment book with each day cut into one hour intervals. you can block off several hours for a single task if you need to but by default you change what youre doing every hour.when you use time that way its merely a practical problem to meet with someone. find an open slot in your schedule book them and youre done.most powerful people are on the managers schedule. its the schedule of command. but theres another way of using time thats common among people who make things like programmers and writers. they generally prefer to use time in units of half a day at least. you cant write or program well in units of an hour. thats barely enough time to get started.when youre operating on the makers schedule meetings are a disaster. a single meeting can blow a whole afternoon by breaking it into two pieces each too small to do anything hard in. plus you have to remember to go to the meeting. thats no problem for someone on the managers schedule. theres always something coming on the next hour the only question is what. but when someone on the makers schedule has a meeting they have to think about it.for someone on the makers schedule having a meeting is like throwing an exception. it doesnt merely cause you to switch from one task to another it changes the mode in which you work.i find one meeting can sometimes affect a whole day. a meeting commonly blows at least half a day by breaking up a morning or afternoon. but in addition theres sometimes a cascading effect. if i know the afternoon is going to be broken up im slightly less likely to start something ambitious in the morning. i know this may sound oversensitive but if youre a maker think of your own case. dont your spirits rise at the thought of having an entire day free to work with no appointments at all well that means your spirits are correspondingly depressed when you dont. and ambitious projects are by definition close to the limits of your capacity. a small decrease in morale is enough to kill them off.each type of schedule works fine by itself. problems arise when they meet. since most powerful people operate on the managers schedule theyre in a position to make everyone resonate at their frequency if they want to. but the smarter ones restrain themselves if they know that some of the people working for them need long chunks of time to work in.our case is an unusual one. nearly all investors including all vcs i know operate on the managers schedule. but y combinator runs on the makers schedule. rtm and trevor and i do because we always have and jessica does too mostly because shes gotten into sync with us.i wouldnt be surprised if there start to be more companies like us. i suspect founders may increasingly be able to resist or at least postpone turning into managers just as a few decades ago they started to be able to resist switching from jeans to suits.how do we manage to advise so many startups on the makers schedule by using the classic device for simulating the managers schedule within the makers office hours. several times a week i set aside a chunk of time to meet founders weve funded. these chunks of time are at the end of my working day and i wrote a signup program that ensures all the appointments within a given set of office hours are clustered at the end. because they come at the end of my day these meetings are never an interruption. unless their working day ends at the same time as mine the meeting presumably interrupts theirs but since they made the appointment it must be worth it to them. during busy periods office hours sometimes get long enough that they compress the day but they never interrupt it.when we were working on our own startup back in the 90s i evolved another trick for partitioning the day. i used to program from dinner till about 3 am every day because at night no one could interrupt me. then id sleep till about 11 am and come in and work until dinner on what i called business stuff. i never thought of it in these terms but in effect i had two workdays each day one on the managers schedule and one on the makers.when youre operating on the managers schedule you can do something youd never want to do on the makers you can have speculative meetings. you can meet someone just to get to know one another. if you have an empty slot in your schedule why not maybe it will turn out you can help one another in some way.business people in silicon valley and the whole world for that matter have speculative meetings all the time. theyre effectively free if youre on the managers schedule. theyre so common that theres distinctive language for proposing them saying that you want to grab coffee for example.speculative meetings are terribly costly if youre on the makers schedule though. which puts us in something of a bind. everyone assumes that like other investors we run on the managers schedule. so they introduce us to someone they think we ought to meet or send us an email proposing we grab coffee. at this point we have two options neither of them good we can meet with them and lose half a days work or we can try to avoid meeting them and probably offend them.till recently we werent clear in our own minds about the source of the problem. we just took it for granted that we had to either blow our schedules or offend people. but now that ive realized whats going on perhaps theres a third option to write something explaining the two types of schedule. maybe eventually if the conflict between the managers schedule and the makers schedule starts to be more widely understood it will become less of a problem.those of us on the makers schedule are willing to compromise. we know we have to have some number of meetings. all we ask from those on the managers schedule is that they understand the cost.

a lot of cities look at silicon valley and ask how could we make something like that happen here the organic way to do it is to establish a firstrate university in a place where rich people want to live. thats how silicon valley happened. but could you shortcut the process by funding startupspossibly. lets consider what it would take.the first thing to understand is that encouraging startups is a different problem from encouraging startups in a particular city. the latter is much more expensive.people sometimes think they could improve the startup scene in their town by starting something like y combinator there but in fact it will have near zero effect. i know because y combinator itself had near zero effect on boston when we were based there half the year. the people we funded came from all over the country indeed the world and afterward they went wherever they could get more fundingwhich generally meant silicon valley.the seed funding business is not a regional business because at that stage startups are mobile. theyre just a couple founders with laptops. 1if you want to encourage startups in a particular city you have to fund startups that wont leave. there are two ways to do that have rules preventing them from leaving or fund them at the point in their life when they naturally take root. the first approach is a mistake because it becomes a filter for selecting bad startups. if your terms force startups to do things they dont want to only the desperate ones will take your money.good startups will move to another city as a condition of funding. what they wont do is agree not to move the next time they need funding. so the only way to get them to stay is to give them enough that they never need to leave.how much would that take if you want to keep startups from leaving your town you have to give them enough that theyre not tempted by an offer from silicon valley vcs that requires them to move. a startup would be able to refuse such an offer if they had grown to the point where they were a rooted in your town andor b so successful that vcs would fund them even if they didnt move.how much would it cost to grow a startup to that point a minimum of several hundred thousand dollars. wufoo seem to have rooted themselves in tampa on 118k but theyre an extreme case. on average it would take at least half a million.so if it seems too good to be true to think you could grow a local silicon valley by giving startups 1520k each like y combinator thats because it is. to make them stick around youd have to give them at least 20 times that much.however even that is an interesting prospect. suppose to be on the safe side it would cost a million dollars per startup. if you could get startups to stick to your town for a million apiece then for a billion dollars you could bring in a thousand startups. that probably wouldnt push you past silicon valley itself but it might get you second place.for the price of a football stadium any town that was decent to live in could make itself one of the biggest startup hubs in the world.whats more it wouldnt take very long. you could probably do it in five years. during the term of one mayor. and it would get easier over time because the more startups you had in town the less it would take to get new ones to move there. by the time you had a thousand startups in town the vcs wouldnt be trying so hard to get them to move to silicon valley instead theyd be opening local offices. then youd really be in good shape. youd have started a selfsustaining chain reaction like the one that drives the valley.but now comes the hard part. you have to pick the startups. how do you do that picking startups is a rare and valuable skill and the handful of people who have it are not readily hireable. and this skill is so hard to measure that if a government did try to hire people with it theyd almost certainly get the wrong ones.for example a city could give money to a vc fund to establish a local branch and let them make the choices. but only a bad vc fund would take that deal. they wouldnt seem bad to the city officials. theyd seem very impressive. but theyd be bad at picking startups. thats the characteristic failure mode of vcs. all vcs look impressive to limited partners. the difference between the good ones and the bad ones only becomes visible in the other half of their jobs choosing and advising startups. 2what you really want is a pool of local angel investorspeople investing money they made from their own startups. but unfortunately you run into a chicken and egg problem here. if your city isnt already a startup hub there wont be people there who got rich from startups. and there is no way i can think of that a city could attract angels from outside. by definition theyre rich. theres no incentive that would make them move. 3however a city could select startups by piggybacking on the expertise of investors who werent local. it would be pretty straightforward to make a list of the most eminent silicon valley angels and from that to generate a list of all the startups theyd invested in. if a city offered these companies a million dollars each to move a lot of the earlier stage ones would probably take it.preposterous as this plan sounds its probably the most efficient way a city could select good startups.it would hurt the startups somewhat to be separated from their original investors. on the other hand the extra million dollars would give them a lot more runway.would the transplanted startups survive quite possibly. the only way to find out would be to try it. it would be a pretty cheap experiment as civil expenditures go. pick 30 startups that eminent angels have recently invested in give them each a million dollars if theyll relocate to your city and see what happens after a year. if they seem to be thriving you can try importing startups on a larger scale.dont be too legalistic about the conditions under which theyre allowed to leave. just have a gentlemens agreement.dont try to do it on the cheap and pick only 10 for the initial experiment. if you do this on too small a scale youll just guarantee failure. startups need to be around other startups. 30 would be enough to feel like a community.dont try to make them all work in some renovated warehouse youve made into an incubator. real startups prefer to work in their own spaces.in fact dont impose any restrictions on the startups at all. startup founders are mostly hackers and hackers are much more constrained by gentlemens agreements than regulations. if they shake your hand on a promise theyll keep it. but show them a lock and their first thought is how to pick it.interestingly the 30startup experiment could be done by any sufficiently rich private citizen. and what pressure it would put on the city if it worked. 4should the city take stock in return for the money in principle theyre entitled to but how would they choose valuations for the startups you couldnt just give them all the same valuation that would be too low for some whod turn you down and too high for others because it might make their next round a down round. and since were assuming were doing this without being able to pick startups we also have to assume we cant value them since thats practically the same thing.another reason not to take stock in the startups is that startups are often involved in disreputable things. so are established companies but they dont get blamed for it. if someone gets murdered by someone they met on facebook the press will treat the story as if it were about facebook. if someone gets murdered by someone they met at a supermarket the press will just treat it as a story about a murder. so understand that if you invest in startups they might build things that get used for pornography or filesharing or the expression of unfashionable opinions. you should probably sponsor this project jointly with your political opponents so they cant use whatever the startups do as a club to beat you with.it would be too much of a political liability just to give the startups the money though. so the best plan would be to make it convertible debt but which didnt convert except in a really big round like 20 million.how well this scheme worked would depend on the city. there are some towns like portland that would be easy to turn into startup hubs and others like detroit where it would really be an uphill battle. so be honest with yourself about the sort of town you have before you try this.it will be easier in proportion to how much your town resembles san francisco. do you have good weather do people live downtown or have they abandoned the center for the suburbs would the city be described as hip and tolerant or as reflecting traditional values are there good universities nearby are there walkable neighborhoods would nerds feel at home if you answered yes to all these questions you might be able not only to pull off this scheme but to do it for less than a million per startup.i realize the chance of any city having the political will to carry out this plan is microscopically small. i just wanted to explore what it would take if one did. how hard would it be to jumpstart a silicon valley its fascinating to think this prize might be within the reach of so many cities. so even though theyll all still spend the money on the stadium at least now someone can ask them why did you choose to do that instead of becoming a serious rival to silicon valley

it struck me recently how few of the most successful people i know are mean. there are exceptions but remarkably few.meanness isnt rare. in fact one of the things the internet has shown us is how mean people can be. a few decades ago only famous people and professional writers got to publish their opinions. now everyone can and we can all see the long tail of meanness that had previously been hidden.and yet while there are clearly a lot of mean people out there there are next to none among the most successful people i know. whats going on here are meanness and success inversely correlatedpart of whats going on of course is selection bias. i only know people who work in certain fields startup founders programmers professors. im willing to believe that successful people in other fields are mean. maybe successful hedge fund managers are mean i dont know enough to say. it seems quite likely that most successful drug lords are mean. but there are at least big chunks of the world that mean people dont rule and that territory seems to be growing.my wife and y combinator cofounder jessica is one of those rare people who have xray vision for character. being married to her is like standing next to an airport baggage scanner. she came to the startup world from investment banking and she has always been struck both by how consistently successful startup founders turn out to be good people and how consistently bad people fail as startup founders.why i think there are several reasons. one is that being mean makes you stupid. thats why i hate fights. you never do your best work in a fight because fights are not sufficiently general. winning is always a function of the situation and the people involved. you dont win fights by thinking of big ideas but by thinking of tricks that work in one particular case. and yet fighting is just as much work as thinking about real problems. which is particularly painful to someone who cares how their brain is used your brain goes fast but you get nowhere like a car spinning its wheels.startups dont win by attacking. they win by transcending. there are exceptions of course but usually the way to win is to race ahead not to stop and fight.another reason mean founders lose is that they cant get the best people to work for them. they can hire people who will put up with them because they need a job. but the best people have other options. a mean person cant convince the best people to work for him unless he is super convincing. and while having the best people helps any organization its critical for startups.there is also a complementary force at work if you want to build great things it helps to be driven by a spirit of benevolence. the startup founders who end up richest are not the ones driven by money. the ones driven by money take the big acquisition offer that nearly every successful startup gets en route. 1 the ones who keep going are driven by something else. they may not say so explicitly but theyre usually trying to improve the world. which means people with a desire to improve the world have a natural advantage. 2the exciting thing is that startups are not just one random type of work in which meanness and success are inversely correlated. this kind of work is the future.for most of history success meant control of scarce resources. one got that by fighting whether literally in the case of pastoral nomads driving huntergatherers into marginal lands or metaphorically in the case of gilded age financiers contending with one another to assemble railroad monopolies. for most of history success meant success at zerosum games. and in most of them meanness was not a handicap but probably an advantage.that is changing. increasingly the games that matter are not zerosum. increasingly you win not by fighting to get control of a scarce resource but by having new ideas and building new things. 3there have long been games where you won by having new ideas. in the third century bc archimedes won by doing that. at least until an invading roman army killed him. which illustrates why this change is happening for new ideas to matter you need a certain degree of civil order. and not just not being at war. you also need to prevent the sort of economic violence that nineteenth century magnates practiced against one another and communist countries practiced against their citizens. people need to feel that what they create cant be stolen. 4that has always been the case for thinkers which is why this trend began with them. when you think of successful people from history who werent ruthless you get mathematicians and writers and artists. the exciting thing is that their m.o. seems to be spreading. the games played by intellectuals are leaking into the real world and this is reversing the historical polarity of the relationship between meanness and success.so im really glad i stopped to think about this. jessica and i have always worked hard to teach our kids not to be mean. we tolerate noise and mess and junk food but not meanness. and now i have both an additional reason to crack down on it and an additional argument to use when i do that being mean makes you fail.

there are two distinct ways to be politically moderate on purpose and by accident. intentional moderates are trimmers deliberately choosing a position midway between the extremes of right and left. accidental moderates end up in the middle on average because they make up their own minds about each question and the far right and far left are roughly equally wrong.you can distinguish intentional from accidental moderates by the distribution of their opinions. if the far left opinion on some matter is 0 and the far right opinion 100 an intentional moderates opinion on every question will be near 50. whereas an accidental moderates opinions will be scattered over a broad range but will like those of the intentional moderate average to about 50.intentional moderates are similar to those on the far left and the far right in that their opinions are in a sense not their own. the defining quality of an ideologue whether on the left or the right is to acquire ones opinions in bulk. you dont get to pick and choose. your opinions about taxation can be predicted from your opinions about sex. and although intentional moderates might seem to be the opposite of ideologues their beliefs though in their case the word positions might be more accurate are also acquired in bulk. if the median opinion shifts to the right or left the intentional moderate must shift with it. otherwise they stop being moderate.accidental moderates on the other hand not only choose their own answers but choose their own questions. they may not care at all about questions that the left and right both think are terribly important. so you can only even measure the politics of an accidental moderate from the intersection of the questions they care about and those the left and right care about and this can sometimes be vanishingly small.it is not merely a manipulative rhetorical trick to say if youre not with us youre against us but often simply false.moderates are sometimes derided as cowards particularly by the extreme left. but while it may be accurate to call intentional moderates cowards openly being an accidental moderate requires the most courage of all because you get attacked from both right and left and you dont have the comfort of being an orthodox member of a large group to sustain you.nearly all the most impressive people i know are accidental moderates. if i knew a lot of professional athletes or people in the entertainment business that might be different. being on the far left or far right doesnt affect how fast you run or how well you sing. but someone who works with ideas has to be independentminded to do it well.or more precisely you have to be independentminded about the ideas you work with. you could be mindlessly doctrinaire in your politics and still be a good mathematician. in the 20th century a lot of very smart people were marxists  just no one who was smart about the subjects marxism involves. but if the ideas you use in your work intersect with the politics of your time you have two choices be an accidental moderate or be mediocre.notes1 its possible in theory for one side to be entirely right and the other to be entirely wrong. indeed ideologues must always believe this is the case. but historically it rarely has been.2 for some reason the far right tend to ignore moderates rather than despise them as backsliders. im not sure why. perhaps it means that the far right is less ideological than the far left. or perhaps that they are more confident or more resigned or simply more disorganized. i just dont know.3 having heretical opinions doesnt mean you have to express them openly. it may be easier to have them if you dont.

if you have a us startup called x and you dont have x.com you should probably change your name.the reason is not just that people cant find you. for companies with mobile apps especially having the right domain name is not as critical as it used to be for getting users. the problem with not having the .com of your name is that it signals weakness. unless youre so big that your reputation precedes you a marginal domain suggests youre a marginal company. whereas as stripe shows having x.com signals strength even if it has no relation to what you do.even good founders can be in denial about this. their denial derives from two very powerful forces identity and lack of imagination.x is what we are founders think. theres no other name as good. both of which are false.you can fix the first by stepping back from the problem. imagine youd called your company something else. if you had surely youd be just as attached to that name as you are to your current one. the idea of switching to your current name would seem repellent. 1theres nothing intrinsically great about your current name. nearly all your attachment to it comes from it being attached to you. 2the way to neutralize the second source of denial your inability to think of other potential names is to acknowledge that youre bad at naming. naming is a completely separate skill from those you need to be a good founder. you can be a great startup founder but hopeless at thinking of names for your company.once you acknowledge that you stop believing there is nothing else you could be called. there are lots of other potential names that are as good or better you just cant think of them.how do you find them one answer is the default way to solve problems youre bad at find someone else who can think of names. but with company names there is another possible approach. it turns out almost any word or word pair that is not an obviously bad name is a sufficiently good one and the number of such domains is so large that you can find plenty that are cheap or even untaken. so make a list and try to buy some. thats what stripe did. their search also turned up parse.com which their friends at parse took.the reason i know that naming companies is a distinct skill orthogonal to the others you need in a startup is that i happen to have it. back when i was running yc and did more office hours with startups i would often help them find new names. 80 of the time we could find at least one good name in a 20 minute office hour slot.now when i do office hours i have to focus on more important questions like what the company is doing. i tell them when they need to change their name. but i know the power of the forces that have them in their grip so i know most wont listen. 3there are of course examples of startups that have succeeded without having the .com of their name. there are startups that have succeeded despite any number of different mistakes. but this mistake is less excusable than most. its something that can be fixed in a couple days if you have sufficient discipline to acknowledge the problem.100 of the top 20 yc companies by valuation have the .com of their name. 94 of the top 50 do. but only 66 of companies in the current batch have the .com of their name. which suggests there are lessons ahead for most of the rest one way or another.notes1 incidentally this thought experiment works for nationality and religion too.2 the liking you have for a name that has become part of your identity manifests itself not directly which would be easy to discount but as a collection of specious beliefs about its intrinsic qualities. this too is true of nationality and religion as well.3 sometimes founders know its a problem that they dont have the .com of their name but delusion strikes a step later in the belief that theyll be able to buy it despite having no evidence its for sale. dont believe a domain is for sale unless the owner has already told you an asking price.

theres one kind of opinion id be very afraid to express publicly. if someone i knew to be both a domain expert and a reasonable person proposed an idea that sounded preposterous id be very reluctant to say that will never work.anyone who has studied the history of ideas and especially the history of science knows thats how big things start. someone proposes an idea that sounds crazy most people dismiss it then it gradually takes over the world.most implausiblesounding ideas are in fact bad and could be safely dismissed. but not when theyre proposed by reasonable domain experts. if the person proposing the idea is reasonable then they know how implausible it sounds. and yet theyre proposing it anyway. that suggests they know something you dont. and if they have deep domain expertise thats probably the source of it. 1such ideas are not merely unsafe to dismiss but disproportionately likely to be interesting. when the average person proposes an implausiblesounding idea its implausibility is evidence of their incompetence. but when a reasonable domain expert does it the situation is reversed. theres something like an efficient market here on average the ideas that seem craziest will if correct have the biggest effect. so if you can eliminate the theory that the person proposing an implausiblesounding idea is incompetent its implausibility switches from evidence that its boring to evidence that its exciting. 2such ideas are not guaranteed to work. but they dont have to be. they just have to be sufficiently good bets  to have sufficiently high expected value. and i think on average they do. i think if you bet on the entire set of implausiblesounding ideas proposed by reasonable domain experts youd end up net ahead.the reason is that everyone is too conservative. the word paradigm is overused but this is a case where its warranted. everyone is too much in the grip of the current paradigm. even the people who have the new ideas undervalue them initially. which means that before they reach the stage of proposing them publicly theyve already subjected them to an excessively strict filter. 3the wise response to such an idea is not to make statements but to ask questions because theres a real mystery here. why has this smart and reasonable person proposed an idea that seems so wrong are they mistaken or are you one of you has to be. if youre the one whos mistaken that would be good to know because it means theres a hole in your model of the world. but even if theyre mistaken it should be interesting to learn why. a trap that an expert falls into is one you have to worry about too.this all seems pretty obvious. and yet there are clearly a lot of people who dont share my fear of dismissing new ideas. why do they do it why risk looking like a jerk now and a fool later instead of just reserving judgementone reason they do it is envy. if you propose a radical new idea and it succeeds your reputation and perhaps also your wealth will increase proportionally. some people would be envious if that happened and this potential envy propagates back into a conviction that you must be wrong.another reason people dismiss new ideas is that its an easy way to seem sophisticated. when a new idea first emerges it usually seems pretty feeble. its a mere hatchling. received wisdom is a fullgrown eagle by comparison. so its easy to launch a devastating attack on a new idea and anyone who does will seem clever to those who dont understand this asymmetry.this phenomenon is exacerbated by the difference between how those working on new ideas and those attacking them are rewarded. the rewards for working on new ideas are weighted by the value of the outcome. so its worth working on something that only has a 10 chance of succeeding if it would make things more than 10x better. whereas the rewards for attacking new ideas are roughly constant such attacks seem roughly equally clever regardless of the target.people will also attack new ideas when they have a vested interest in the old ones. its not surprising for example that some of darwins harshest critics were churchmen. people build whole careers on some ideas. when someone claims theyre false or obsolete they feel threatened.the lowest form of dismissal is mere factionalism to automatically dismiss any idea associated with the opposing faction. the lowest form of all is to dismiss an idea because of who proposed it.but the main thing that leads reasonable people to dismiss new ideas is the same thing that holds people back from proposing them the sheer pervasiveness of the current paradigm. it doesnt just affect the way we think it is the lego blocks we build thoughts out of. popping out of the current paradigm is something only a few people can do. and even they usually have to suppress their intuitions at first like a pilot flying through cloud who has to trust his instruments over his sense of balance. 4paradigms dont just define our present thinking. they also vacuum up the trail of crumbs that led to them making our standards for new ideas impossibly high. the current paradigm seems so perfect to us its offspring that we imagine it must have been accepted completely as soon as it was discovered  that whatever the church thought of the heliocentric model astronomers must have been convinced as soon as copernicus proposed it. far in fact from it. copernicus published the heliocentric model in 1532 but it wasnt till the mid seventeenth century that the balance of scientific opinion shifted in its favor. 5few understand how feeble new ideas look when they first appear. so if you want to have new ideas yourself one of the most valuable things you can do is to learn what they look like when theyre born. read about how new ideas happened and try to get yourself into the heads of people at the time. how did things look to them when the new idea was only halffinished and even the person who had it was only halfconvinced it was rightbut you dont have to stop at history. you can observe big new ideas being born all around you right now. just look for a reasonable domain expert proposing something that sounds wrong.if youre nice as well as wise you wont merely resist attacking such people but encourage them. having new ideas is a lonely business. only those whove tried it know how lonely. these people need your help. and if you help them youll probably learn something in the process.notes1 this domain expertise could be in another field. indeed such crossovers tend to be particularly promising.2 im not claiming this principle extends much beyond math engineering and the hard sciences. in politics for example crazysounding ideas generally are as bad as they sound. though arguably this is not an exception because the people who propose them are not in fact domain experts politicians are domain experts in political tactics like how to get elected and how to get legislation passed but not in the world that policy acts upon. perhaps no one could be.3 this sense of paradigm was defined by thomas kuhn in his structure of scientific revolutions but i also recommend his copernican revolution where you can see him at work developing the idea.4 this is one reason people with a touch of aspergers may have an advantage in discovering new ideas. theyre always flying on instruments.5 hall rupert. from galileo to newton. collins 1963. this book is particularly good at getting into contemporaries heads.

the fiery reaction to the release of arc had an unexpected consequence it made me realize i had a design philosophy. the main complaint of the more articulate critics was that arc seemed so flimsy. after years of working on it all i had to show for myself were a few thousand lines of macros why hadnt i worked on more substantial problemsas i was mulling over these remarks it struck me how familiar they seemed. this was exactly the kind of thing people said at first about viaweb and y combinator and most of my essays.when we launched viaweb it seemed laughable to vcs and ecommerce experts. we were just a couple guys in an apartment which did not seem cool in 1995 the way it does now. and the thing wed built as far as they could tell wasnt even software. software to them equalled big honking windows apps. since viaweb was the first webbased app theyd seen it seemed to be nothing more than a website. they were even more contemptuous when they discovered that viaweb didnt process credit card transactions we didnt for the whole first year. transaction processing seemed to them what ecommerce was all about. it sounded serious and difficult.and yet mysteriously viaweb ended up crushing all its competitors.the initial reaction to y combinator was almost identical. it seemed laughably lightweight. startup funding meant series a rounds millions of dollars given to a small number of startups founded by people with established credentials after months of serious businesslike meetings on terms described in a document a foot thick. y combinator seemed inconsequential. its too early to say yet whether y combinator will turn out like viaweb but judging from the number of imitations a lot of people seem to think were on to something.i cant measure whether my essays are successful except in page views but the reaction to them is at least different from when i started. at first the default reaction of the slashdot trolls was translated into articulate terms who is this guy and what authority does he have to write about these topics i havent read the essay but theres no way anything so short and written in such an informal style could have anything useful to say about such and such topic when people with degrees in the subject have already written many thick books about it. now theres a new generation of trolls on a new generation of sites but they have at least started to omit the initial who is this guynow people are saying the same things about arc that they said at first about viaweb and y combinator and most of my essays. why the pattern the answer i realized is that my m.o. for all four has been the same.here it is i like to find a simple solutions b to overlooked problems c that actually need to be solved and d deliver them as informally as possible e starting with a very crude version 1 then f iterating rapidly.when i first laid out these principles explicitly i noticed something striking this is practically a recipe for generating a contemptuous initial reaction. though simple solutions are better they dont seem as impressive as complex ones. overlooked problems are by definition problems that most people think dont matter. delivering solutions in an informal way means that instead of judging something by the way its presented people have to actually understand it which is more work. and starting with a crude version 1 means your initial effort is always small and incomplete.id noticed of course that people never seemed to grasp new ideas at first. i thought it was just because most people were stupid. now i see theres more to it than that. like a contrarian investment fund someone following this strategy will almost always be doing things that seem wrong to the average person.as with contrarian investment strategies thats exactly the point. this technique is successful in the long term because it gives you all the advantages other people forgo by trying to seem legit. if you work on overlooked problems youre more likely to discover new things because you have less competition. if you deliver solutions informally you a save all the effort you would have had to expend to make them look impressive and b avoid the danger of fooling yourself as well as your audience. and if you release a crude version 1 then iterate your solution can benefit from the imagination of nature which as feynman pointed out is more powerful than your own.in the case of viaweb the simple solution was to make the software run on the server. the overlooked problem was to generate web sites automatically in 1995 online stores were all made by hand by human designers but we knew this wouldnt scale. the part that actually mattered was graphic design not transaction processing. the informal delivery mechanism was me showing up in jeans and a tshirt at some retailers office. and the crude version 1 was if i remember correctly less than 10000 lines of code when we launched.the power of this technique extends beyond startups and programming languages and essays. it probably extends to any kind of creative work. certainly it can be used in painting this is exactly what cezanne and klee did.at y combinator we bet money on it in the sense that we encourage the startups we fund to work this way. there are always new ideas right under your nose. so look for simple things that other people have overlookedthings people will later claim were obviousespecially when theyve been led astray by obsolete conventions or by trying to do things that are superficially impressive. figure out what the real problem is and make sure you solve that. dont worry about trying to look corporate the product is what wins in the long term. and launch as soon as you can so you start learning from users what you should have been making.reddit is a classic example of this approach. when reddit first launched it seemed like there was nothing to it. to the graphically unsophisticated its deliberately minimal design seemed like no design at all. but reddit solved the real problem which was to tell people what was new and otherwise stay out of the way. as a result it became massively successful. now that conventional ideas have caught up with it it seems obvious. people look at reddit and think the founders were lucky. like all such things it was harder than it looked. the reddits pushed so hard against the current that they reversed it now it looks like theyre merely floating downstream.so when you look at something like reddit and think i wish i could think of an idea like that remember ideas like that are all around you. but you ignore them because they look wrong.

a nonprofit ive supported for years just launched a new nft. it has a dramatic name save thousands of lives because thats what the proceeds will do.noora has been saving lives for 7 years. they run programs in hospitals in south asia to teach new mothers how to take care of their babies once they get home. theyre in 165 hospitals now. and because they know the numbers before and after they start at a new hospital they can measure the impact they have. it is massive. for every 1000 live births they save 9 babies.this number comes from a study of 133733 families at 28 different hospitals that noora conducted in collaboration with the better birth team at ariadne labs a joint center for health systems innovation at brigham and womens hospital and harvard t.h. chan school of public health.noora is so effective that even if you measure their costs in the most conservative way by dividing their entire budget by the number of lives saved the cost of saving a life is the lowest ive seen. 1235.for this nft theyre going to issue a public report tracking how this specific tranche of money is spent and estimating the number of lives saved as a result.nfts are a new territory and this way of using them is especially new but im excited about its potential. and im excited to see what happens with this particular auction because unlike an nft representing something that has already happened this nft gets better as the price gets higher.the reserve price was about 2.5 million because thats what it takes for the name to be accurate thats what it costs to save 2000 lives. but the higher the price of this nft goes the more lives will be saved. what a sentence to be able to write.

when i was young i thought old people had everything figured out. now that im old i know this isnt true.i constantly feel like a noob. it seems like im always talking to some startup working in a new field i know nothing about or reading a book about a topic i dont understand well enough or visiting some new country where i dont know how things work.its not pleasant to feel like a noob. and the word noob is certainly not a compliment. and yet today i realized something encouraging about being a noob the more of a noob you are locally the less of a noob you are globally.for example if you stay in your home country youll feel less of a noob than if you move to farawavia where everything works differently. and yet youll know more if you move. so the feeling of being a noob is inversely correlated with actual ignorance.but if the feeling of being a noob is good for us why do we dislike it what evolutionary purpose could such an aversion servei think the answer is that there are two sources of feeling like a noob being stupid and doing something novel. our dislike of feeling like a noob is our brain telling us come on come on figure this out. which was the right thing to be thinking for most of human history. the life of huntergatherers was complex but it didnt change as much as life does now. they didnt suddenly have to figure out what to do about cryptocurrency. so it made sense to be biased toward competence at existing problems over the discovery of new ones. it made sense for humans to dislike the feeling of being a noob just as in a world where food was scarce it made sense for them to dislike the feeling of being hungry.now that too much food is more of a problem than too little our dislike of feeling hungry leads us astray. and i think our dislike of feeling like a noob does too.though it feels unpleasant and people will sometimes ridicule you for it the more you feel like a noob the better.

i bet you the current issue of cosmopolitan has an article whose title begins with a number. 7 things he wont tell you about sex or something like that. some popular magazines feature articles of this type on the cover of every issue. that cant be happening by accident. editors must know they attract readers.why do readers like the list of n things so much mainly because its easier to read than a regular article. 1 structurally the list of n things is a degenerate case of essay. an essay can go anywhere the writer wants. in a list of n things the writer agrees to constrain himself to a collection of points of roughly equal importance and he tells the reader explicitly what they are.some of the work of reading an article is understanding its structurefiguring out what in high school wed have called its outline. not explicitly of course but someone who really understands an article probably has something in his brain afterward that corresponds to such an outline. in a list of n things this work is done for you. its structure is an exoskeleton.as well as being explicit the structure is guaranteed to be of the simplest possible type a few main points with few to no subordinate ones and no particular connection between them.because the main points are unconnected the list of n things is random access. theres no thread of reasoning you have to follow. you could read the list in any order. and because the points are independent of one another they work like watertight compartments in an unsinkable ship. if you get bored with or cant understand or dont agree with one point you dont have to give up on the article. you can just abandon that one and skip to the next. a list of n things is parallel and therefore fault tolerant.there are times when this format is what a writer wants. one obviously is when what you have to say actually is a list of n things. i once wrote an essay about the mistakes that kill startups and a few people made fun of me for writing something whose title began with a number. but in that case i really was trying to make a complete catalog of a number of independent things. in fact one of the questions i was trying to answer was how many there were.there are other less legitimate reasons for using this format. for example i use it when i get close to a deadline. if i have to give a talk and i havent started it a few days beforehand ill sometimes play it safe and make the talk a list of n things.the list of n things is easier for writers as well as readers. when youre writing a real essay theres always a chance youll hit a dead end. a real essay is a train of thought and some trains of thought just peter out. thats an alarming possibility when you have to give a talk in a few days. what if you run out of ideas the compartmentalized structure of the list of n things protects the writer from his own stupidity in much the same way it protects the reader. if you run out of ideas on one point no problem it wont kill the essay. you can take out the whole point if you need to and the essay will still survive.writing a list of n things is so relaxing. you think of n2 of them in the first 5 minutes. so bang theres the structure and you just have to fill it in. as you think of more points you just add them to the end. maybe you take out or rearrange or combine a few but at every stage you have a valid though initially lowres list of n things. its like the sort of programming where you write a version 1 very quickly and then gradually modify it but at every point have working codeor the style of painting where you begin with a complete but very blurry sketch done in an hour then spend a week cranking up the resolution.because the list of n things is easier for writers too its not always a damning sign when readers prefer it. its not necessarily evidence readers are lazy it could also mean they dont have much confidence in the writer. the list of n things is in that respect the cheeseburger of essay forms. if youre eating at a restaurant you suspect is bad your best bet is to order the cheeseburger. even a bad cook can make a decent cheeseburger. and there are pretty strict conventions about what a cheeseburger should look like. you can assume the cook isnt going to try something weird and artistic. the list of n things similarly limits the damage that can be done by a bad writer. you know its going to be about whatever the title says and the format prevents the writer from indulging in any flights of fancy.because the list of n things is the easiest essay form it should be a good one for beginning writers. and in fact it is what most beginning writers are taught. the classic 5 paragraph essay is really a list of n things for n  3. but the students writing them dont realize theyre using the same structure as the articles they read in cosmopolitan. theyre not allowed to include the numbers and theyre expected to spackle over the gaps with gratuitous transitions furthermore... and cap the thing at either end with introductory and concluding paragraphs so it will look superficially like a real essay. 2it seems a fine plan to start students off with the list of n things. its the easiest form. but if were going to do that why not do it openly let them write lists of n things like the pros with numbers and no transitions or conclusion.there is one case where the list of n things is a dishonest format when you use it to attract attention by falsely claiming the list is an exhaustive one. i.e. if you write an article that purports to be about the 7 secrets of success. that kind of title is the same sort of reflexive challenge as a whodunit. you have to at least look at the article to check whether theyre the same 7 youd list. are you overlooking one of the secrets of success better check.its fine to put the before the number if you really believe youve made an exhaustive list. but evidence suggests most things with titles like this are linkbait.the greatest weakness of the list of n things is that theres so little room for new thought. the main point of essay writing when done right is the new ideas you have while doing it. a real essay as the name implies is dynamic you dont know what youre going to write when you start. it will be about whatever you discover in the course of writing it.this can only happen in a very limited way in a list of n things. you make the title first and thats what its going to be about. you cant have more new ideas in the writing than will fit in the watertight compartments you set up initially. and your brain seems to know this because you dont have room for new ideas you dont have them.another advantage of admitting to beginning writers that the 5 paragraph essay is really a list of n things is that we can warn them about this. it only lets you experience the defining characteristic of essay writing on a small scale in thoughts of a sentence or two. and its particularly dangerous that the 5 paragraph essay buries the list of n things within something that looks like a more sophisticated type of essay. if you dont know youre using this form you dont know you need to escape it.notes1 articles of this type are also startlingly popular on delicious but i think thats because deliciouspopular is driven by bookmarking not because delicious users are stupid. delicious users are collectors and a list of n things seems particularly collectible because its a collection itself.2 most word problems in school math textbooks are similarly misleading. they look superficially like the application of math to real problems but theyre not. so if anything they reinforce the impression that math is merely a complicated but pointless collection of stuff to be memorized.

if you discover something new theres a significant chance youll be accused of some form of heresy.to discover new things you have to work on ideas that are good but nonobvious if an idea is obviously good other people are probably already working on it. one common way for a good idea to be nonobvious is for it to be hidden in the shadow of some mistaken assumption that people are very attached to. but anything you discover from working on such an idea will tend to contradict the mistaken assumption that was concealing it. and you will thus get a lot of heat from people attached to the mistaken assumption. galileo and darwin are famous examples of this phenomenon but its probably always an ingredient in the resistance to new ideas.so its particularly dangerous for an organization or society to have a culture of pouncing on heresy. when you suppress heresies you dont just prevent people from contradicting the mistaken assumption youre trying to protect. you also suppress any idea that implies indirectly that its false.every cherished mistaken assumption has a dead zone of unexplored ideas around it. and the more preposterous the assumption the bigger the dead zone it creates.there is a positive side to this phenomenon though. if youre looking for new ideas one way to find them is by looking for heresies. when you look at the question this way the depressingly large dead zones around mistaken assumptions become excitingly large mines of new ideas.

the best way to come up with startup ideas is to ask yourself the question what do you wish someone would make for youthere are two types of startup ideas those that grow organically out of your own life and those that you decide from afar are going to be necessary to some class of users other than you. apple was the first type. apple happened because steve wozniak wanted a computer. unlike most people who wanted computers he could design one so he did. and since lots of other people wanted the same thing apple was able to sell enough of them to get the company rolling. they still rely on this principle today incidentally. the iphone is the phone steve jobs wants. 1our own startup viaweb was of the second type. we made software for building online stores. we didnt need this software ourselves. we werent direct marketers. we didnt even know when we started that our users were called direct marketers. but we were comparatively old when we started the company i was 30 and robert morris was 29 so wed seen enough to know users would need this type of software. 2there is no sharp line between the two types of ideas but the most successful startups seem to be closer to the apple type than the viaweb type. when he was writing that first basic interpreter for the altair bill gates was writing something he would use as were larry and sergey when they wrote the first versions of google.organic ideas are generally preferable to the made up kind but particularly so when the founders are young. it takes experience to predict what other people will want. the worst ideas we see at y combinator are from young founders making things they think other people will want.so if you want to start a startup and dont know yet what youre going to do id encourage you to focus initially on organic ideas. whats missing or broken in your daily life sometimes if you just ask that question youll get immediate answers. it must have seemed obviously broken to bill gates that you could only program the altair in machine language.you may need to stand outside yourself a bit to see brokenness because you tend to get used to it and take it for granted. you can be sure its there though. there are always great ideas sitting right under our noses. in 2004 it was ridiculous that harvard undergrads were still using a facebook printed on paper. surely that sort of thing should have been online.there are ideas that obvious lying around now. the reason youre overlooking them is the same reason youd have overlooked the idea of building facebook in 2004 organic startup ideas usually dont seem like startup ideas at first. we know now that facebook was very successful but put yourself back in 2004. putting undergraduates profiles online wouldnt have seemed like much of a startup idea. and in fact it wasnt initially a startup idea. when mark spoke at a yc dinner this winter he said he wasnt trying to start a company when he wrote the first version of facebook. it was just a project. so was the apple i when woz first started working on it. he didnt think he was starting a company. if these guys had thought they were starting companies they might have been tempted to do something more serious and that would have been a mistake.so if you want to come up with organic startup ideas id encourage you to focus more on the idea part and less on the startup part. just fix things that seem broken regardless of whether it seems like the problem is important enough to build a company on. if you keep pursuing such threads it would be hard not to end up making something of value to a lot of people and when you do surprise youve got a company. 3dont be discouraged if what you produce initially is something other people dismiss as a toy. in fact thats a good sign. thats probably why everyone else has been overlooking the idea. the first microcomputers were dismissed as toys. and the first planes and the first cars. at this point when someone comes to us with something that users like but that we could envision forum trolls dismissing as a toy it makes us especially likely to invest.while young founders are at a disadvantage when coming up with madeup ideas theyre the best source of organic ones because theyre at the forefront of technology. they use the latest stuff. they only just decided what to use so why wouldnt they and because they use the latest stuff theyre in a position to discover valuable types of fixable brokenness first.theres nothing more valuable than an unmet need that is just becoming fixable. if you find something broken that you can fix for a lot of people youve found a gold mine. as with an actual gold mine you still have to work hard to get the gold out of it. but at least you know where the seam is and thats the hard part.notes1 this suggests a way to predict areas where apple will be weak things steve jobs doesnt use. e.g. i doubt he is much into gaming.2 in retrospect we should have become direct marketers. if i were doing viaweb again id open our own online store. if we had wed have understood users a lot better. id encourage anyone starting a startup to become one of its users however unnatural it seems.3 possible exception its hard to compete directly with open source software. you can build things for programmers but there has to be some part you can charge for.

a few days ago on the way home from school my nine year old son told me he couldnt wait to get home to write more of the story he was working on. this made me as happy as anything ive heard him say  not just because he was excited about his story but because hed discovered this way of working. working on a project of your own is as different from ordinary work as skating is from walking. its more fun but also much more productive.what proportion of great work has been done by people who were skating in this sense if not all of it certainly a lot.there is something special about working on a project of your own. i wouldnt say exactly that youre happier. a better word would be excited or engaged. youre happy when things are going well but often they arent. when im writing an essay most of the time im worried and puzzled worried that the essay will turn out badly and puzzled because im groping for some idea that i cant see clearly enough. will i be able to pin it down with words in the end i usually can if i take long enough but im never sure the first few attempts often fail.you have moments of happiness when things work out but they dont last long because then youre on to the next problem. so why do it at all because to the kind of people who like working this way nothing else feels as right. you feel as if youre an animal in its natural habitat doing what you were meant to do  not always happy maybe but awake and alive.many kids experience the excitement of working on projects of their own. the hard part is making this converge with the work you do as an adult. and our customs make it harder. we treat playing and hobbies as qualitatively different from work. its not clear to a kid building a treehouse that theres a direct though long route from that to architecture or engineering. and instead of pointing out the route we conceal it by implicitly treating the stuff kids do as different from real work. 1instead of telling kids that their treehouses could be on the path to the work they do as adults we tell them the path goes through school. and unfortunately schoolwork tends to be very different from working on projects of ones own. its usually neither a project nor ones own. so as school gets more serious working on projects of ones own is something that survives if at all as a thin thread off to the side.its a bit sad to think of all the high school kids turning their backs on building treehouses and sitting in class dutifully learning about darwin or newton to pass some exam when the work that made darwin and newton famous was actually closer in spirit to building treehouses than studying for exams.if i had to choose between my kids getting good grades and working on ambitious projects of their own id pick the projects. and not because im an indulgent parent but because ive been on the other end and i know which has more predictive value. when i was picking startups for y combinator i didnt care about applicants grades. but if theyd worked on projects of their own i wanted to hear all about those. 2it may be inevitable that school is the way it is. im not saying we have to redesign it though im not saying we dont just that we should understand what it does to our attitudes to work  that it steers us toward the dutiful plodding kind of work often using competition as bait and away from skating.there are occasionally times when schoolwork becomes a project of ones own. whenever i had to write a paper that would become a project of my own  except in english classes ironically because the things one has to write in english classes are so bogus. and when i got to college and started taking cs classes the programs i had to write became projects of my own. whenever i was writing or programming i was usually skating and that has been true ever since.so where exactly is the edge of projects of ones own thats an interesting question partly because the answer is so complicated and partly because theres so much at stake. there turn out to be two senses in which work can be ones own 1 that youre doing it voluntarily rather than merely because someone told you to and 2 that youre doing it by yourself.the edge of the former is quite sharp. people who care a lot about their work are usually very sensitive to the difference between pulling and being pushed and work tends to fall into one category or the other. but the test isnt simply whether youre told to do something. you can choose to do something youre told to do. indeed you can own it far more thoroughly than the person who told you to do it.for example math homework is for most people something theyre told to do. but for my father who was a mathematician it wasnt. most of us think of the problems in a math book as a way to test or develop our knowledge of the material explained in each section. but to my father the problems were the part that mattered and the text was merely a sort of annotation. whenever he got a new math book it was to him like being given a puzzle here was a new set of problems to solve and hed immediately set about solving all of them.the other sense of a project being ones own  working on it by oneself  has a much softer edge. it shades gradually into collaboration. and interestingly it shades into collaboration in two different ways. one way to collaborate is to share a single project. for example when two mathematicians collaborate on a proof that takes shape in the course of a conversation between them. the other way is when multiple people work on separate projects of their own that fit together like a jigsaw puzzle. for example when one person writes the text of a book and another does the graphic design. 3these two paths into collaboration can of course be combined. but under the right conditions the excitement of working on a project of ones own can be preserved for quite a while before disintegrating into the turbulent flow of work in a large organization. indeed the history of successful organizations is partly the history of techniques for preserving that excitement. 4the team that made the original macintosh were a great example of this phenomenon. people like burrell smith and andy hertzfeld and bill atkinson and susan kare were not just following orders. they were not tennis balls hit by steve jobs but rockets let loose by steve jobs. there was a lot of collaboration between them but they all seem to have individually felt the excitement of working on a project of ones own.in andy hertzfelds book on the macintosh he describes how theyd come back into the office after dinner and work late into the night. people whove never experienced the thrill of working on a project theyre excited about cant distinguish this kind of working long hours from the kind that happens in sweatshops and boiler rooms but theyre at opposite ends of the spectrum. thats why its a mistake to insist dogmatically on worklife balance. indeed the mere expression worklife embodies a mistake it assumes work and life are distinct. for those to whom the word work automatically implies the dutiful plodding kind they are. but for the skaters the relationship between work and life would be better represented by a dash than a slash. i wouldnt want to work on anything that i didnt want to take over my life.of course its easier to achieve this level of motivation when youre making something like the macintosh. its easy for something new to feel like a project of your own. thats one of the reasons for the tendency programmers have to rewrite things that dont need rewriting and to write their own versions of things that already exist. this sometimes alarms managers and measured by total number of characters typed its rarely the optimal solution. but its not always driven simply by arrogance or cluelessness. writing code from scratch is also much more rewarding  so much more rewarding that a good programmer can end up net ahead despite the shocking waste of characters. indeed it may be one of the advantages of capitalism that it encourages such rewriting. a company that needs software to do something cant use the software already written to do it at another company and thus has to write their own which often turns out better. 5the natural alignment between skating and solving new problems is one of the reasons the payoffs from startups are so high. not only is the market price of unsolved problems higher you also get a discount on productivity when you work on them. in fact you get a double increase in productivity when youre doing a cleansheet design its easier to recruit skaters and they get to spend all their time skating.steve jobs knew a thing or two about skaters from having watched steve wozniak. if you can find the right people you only have to tell them what to do at the highest level. theyll handle the details. indeed they insist on it. for a project to feel like your own you must have sufficient autonomy. you cant be working to order or slowed down by bureaucracy.one way to ensure autonomy is not to have a boss at all. there are two ways to do that to be the boss yourself and to work on projects outside of work. though theyre at opposite ends of the scale financially startups and open source projects have a lot in common including the fact that theyre often run by skaters. and indeed theres a wormhole from one end of the scale to the other one of the best ways to discover startup ideas is to work on a project just for fun.if your projects are the kind that make money its easy to work on them. its harder when theyre not. and the hardest part usually is morale. thats where adults have it harder than kids. kids just plunge in and build their treehouse without worrying about whether theyre wasting their time or how it compares to other treehouses. and frankly we could learn a lot from kids here. the high standards most grownups have for real work do not always serve us well.the most important phase in a project of ones own is at the beginning when you go from thinking it might be cool to do x to actually doing x. and at that point high standards are not merely useless but positively harmful. there are a few people who start too many new projects but far more i suspect who are deterred by fear of failure from starting projects that would have succeeded if they had.but if we couldnt benefit as kids from the knowledge that our treehouses were on the path to grownup projects we can at least benefit as grownups from knowing that our projects are on a path that stretches back to treehouses. remember that careless confidence you had as a kid when starting something new that would be a powerful thing to recapture.if its harder as adults to retain that kind of confidence we at least tend to be more aware of what were doing. kids bounce or are herded from one kind of work to the next barely realizing whats happening to them. whereas we know more about different types of work and have more control over which we do. ideally we can have the best of both worlds to be deliberate in choosing to work on projects of our own and carelessly confident in starting new ones.notes1 hobby is a curious word. now it means work that isnt real work  work that one is not to be judged by  but originally it just meant an obsession in a fairly general sense even a political opinion for example that one metaphorically rode as a child rides a hobbyhorse. its hard to say if its recent narrower meaning is a change for the better or the worse. for sure there are lots of false positives  lots of projects that end up being important but are dismissed initially as mere hobbies. but on the other hand the concept provides valuable cover for projects in the early ugly duckling phase.2 tiger parents as parents so often do are fighting the last war. grades mattered more in the old days when the route to success was to acquire credentials while ascending some predefined ladder. but its just as well that their tactics are focused on grades. how awful it would be if they invaded the territory of projects and thereby gave their kids a distaste for this kind of work by forcing them to do it. grades are already a grim fake world and arent harmed much by parental interference but working on ones own projects is a more delicate private thing that could be damaged very easily.3 the complicated gradual edge between working on ones own projects and collaborating with others is one reason there is so much disagreement about the idea of the lone genius. in practice people collaborate or not in all kinds of different ways but the idea of the lone genius is definitely not a myth. theres a core of truth to it that goes with a certain way of working.4 collaboration is powerful too. the optimal organization would combine collaboration and ownership in such a way as to do the least damage to each. interestingly companies and university departments approach this ideal from opposite directions companies insist on collaboration and occasionally also manage both to recruit skaters and allow them to skate and university departments insist on the ability to do independent research which is by custom treated as skating whether it is or not and the people they hire collaborate as much as they choose.5 if a company could design its software in such a way that the best newly arrived programmers always got a clean sheet it could have a kind of eternal youth. that might not be impossible. if you had a software backbone defining a game with sufficiently clear rules individual programmers could write their own players.

i realized recently that we may be able to solve part of the patent problem without waiting for the government.ive never been 100 sure whether patents help or hinder technological progress. when i was a kid i thought they helped. i thought they protected inventors from having their ideas stolen by big companies. maybe that was truer in the past when more things were physical. but regardless of whether patents are in general a good thing there do seem to be bad ways of using them. and since bad uses of patents seem to be increasing there is an increasing call for patent reform.the problem with patent reform is that it has to go through the government. that tends to be slow. but recently i realized we can also attack the problem downstream. as well as pinching off the stream of patents at the point where theyre issued we may in some cases be able to pinch it off at the point where theyre used.one way of using patents that clearly does not encourage innovation is when established companies with bad products use patents to suppress small competitors with good products. this is the type of abuse we may be able to decrease without having to go through the government.the way to do it is to get the companies that are above pulling this sort of trick to pledge publicly not to. then the ones that wont make such a pledge will be very conspicuous. potential employees wont want to work for them. and investors too will be able to see that theyre the sort of company that competes by litigation rather than by making good products.heres the pledgeno first use of software patents against companies with less than 25 people.ive deliberately traded precision for brevity. the patent pledge is not legally binding. its like googles dont be evil. they dont define what evil is but by publicly saying that theyre saying theyre willing to be held to a standard that say altria is not. and though constraining dont be evil has been good for google. technology companies win by attracting the most productive people and the most productive people are attracted to employers who hold themselves to a higher standard than the law requires. 1the patent pledge is in effect a narrower but open source dont be evil. i encourage every technology company to adopt it. if you want to help fix patents encourage your employer to.already most technology companies wouldnt sink to using patents on startups. you dont see google or facebook suing startups for patent infringement. they dont need to. so for the better technology companies the patent pledge requires no change in behavior. theyre just promising to do what theyd do anyway. and when all the companies that wont use patents on startups have said so the holdouts will be very conspicuous.the patent pledge doesnt fix every problem with patents. it wont stop patent trolls for example theyre already pariahs. but the problem the patent pledge does fix may be more serious than the problem of patent trolls. patent trolls are just parasites. a clumsy parasite may occasionally kill the host but thats not its goal. whereas companies that sue startups for patent infringement generally do it with explicit goal of keeping their product off the market.companies that use patents on startups are attacking innovation at the root. now theres something any individual can do about this problem without waiting for the government ask companies where they stand.patent pledge sitenotes1 because the pledge is deliberately vague were going to need common sense when intepreting it. and even more vice versa the pledge is vague in order to make people use common sense when interpreting it.so for example ive deliberately avoided saying whether the 25 people have to be employees or whether contractors count too. if a company has to split hairs that fine about whether a suit would violate the patent pledge its probably still a dick move.

to celebrate airbnbs ipo and to help future founders i thought it might be useful to explain what was special about airbnb.what was special about the airbnbs was how earnest they were. they did nothing halfway and we could sense this even in the interview. sometimes after we interviewed a startup wed be uncertain what to do and have to talk it over. other times wed just look at one another and smile. the airbnbs interview was that kind. we didnt even like the idea that much. nor did users at that stage they had no growth. but the founders seemed so full of energy that it was impossible not to like them.that first impression was not misleading. during the batch our nickname for brian chesky was the tasmanian devil because like the cartoon character he seemed a tornado of energy. all three of them were like that. no one ever worked harder during yc than the airbnbs did. when you talked to the airbnbs they took notes. if you suggested an idea to them in office hours the next time you talked to them theyd not only have implemented it but also implemented two new ideas they had in the process. they probably have the best attitude of any startup weve funded i wrote to mike arrington during the batch.theyre still like that. jessica and i had dinner with brian in the summer of 2018 just the three of us. by this point the company is ten years old. he took a page of notes about ideas for new things airbnb could do.what we didnt realize when we first met brian and joe and nate was that airbnb was on its last legs. after working on the company for a year and getting no growth theyd agreed to give it one last shot. theyd try this y combinator thing and if the company still didnt take off theyd give up.any normal person would have given up already. theyd been funding the company with credit cards. they had a binder full of credit cards theyd maxed out. investors didnt think much of the idea. one investor they met in a cafe walked out in the middle of meeting with them. they thought he was going to the bathroom but he never came back. he didnt even finish his smoothie brian said. and now in late 2008 it was the worst recession in decades. the stock market was in free fall and wouldnt hit bottom for another four months.why hadnt they given up this is a useful question to ask. people like matter reveal their nature under extreme conditions. one thing thats clear is that they werent doing this just for the money. as a moneymaking scheme this was pretty lousy a years work and all they had to show for it was a binder full of maxedout credit cards. so why were they still working on this startup because of the experience theyd had as the first hosts.when they first tried renting out airbeds on their floor during a design convention all they were hoping for was to make enough money to pay their rent that month. but something surprising happened they enjoyed having those first three guests staying with them. and the guests enjoyed it too. both they and the guests had done it because they were in a sense forced to and yet theyd all had a great experience. clearly there was something new here for hosts a new way to make money that had literally been right under their noses and for guests a new way to travel that was in many ways better than hotels.that experience was why the airbnbs didnt give up. they knew theyd discovered something. theyd seen a glimpse of the future and they couldnt let it go.they knew that once people tried staying in what is now called an airbnb they would also realize that this was the future. but only if they tried it and they werent. that was the problem during y combinator to get growth started.airbnbs goal during yc was to reach what we call ramen profitability which means making enough money that the company can pay the founders living expenses if they live on ramen noodles. ramen profitability is not obviously the end goal of any startup but its the most important threshold on the way because this is the point where youre airborne. this is the point where you no longer need investors permission to continue existing. for the airbnbs ramen profitability was 4000 a month 3500 for rent and 500 for food. they taped this goal to the mirror in the bathroom of their apartment.the way to get growth started in something like airbnb is to focus on the hottest subset of the market. if you can get growth started there it will spread to the rest. when i asked the airbnbs where there was most demand they knew from searches new york city. so they focused on new york. they went there in person to visit their hosts and help them make their listings more attractive. a big part of that was better pictures. so joe and brian rented a professional camera and took pictures of the hosts places themselves.this didnt just make the listings better. it also taught them about their hosts. when they came back from their first trip to new york i asked what theyd noticed about hosts that surprised them and they said the biggest surprise was how many of the hosts were in the same position theyd been in they needed this money to pay their rent. this was remember the worst recession in decades and it had hit new york first. it definitely added to the airbnbs sense of mission to feel that people needed them.in late january 2009 about three weeks into y combinator their efforts started to show results and their numbers crept upward. but it was hard to say for sure whether it was growth or just random fluctuation. by february it was clear that it was real growth. they made 460 in fees in the first week of february 897 in the second and 1428 in the third. that was it they were airborne. brian sent me an email on february 22 announcing that they were ramen profitable and giving the last three weeks numbers.i assume you know what youve now set yourself up for next week i responded.brians reply was seven words we are not going to slow down.

one of the most valuable exercises you can try if you want to understand startups is to look at the most successful companies and explain why they were not as lame as they seemed when they first launched. because they practically all seemed lame at first. not just small lame. not just the first step up a big mountain. more like the first step into a swamp.a basic interpreter for the altair how could that ever grow into a giant company people sleeping on airbeds in strangers apartments a web site for college students to stalk one another a wimpy little singleboard computer for hobbyists that used a tv as a monitor a new search engine when there were already about 10 and they were all trying to deemphasize search these ideas didnt just seem small. they seemed wrong. they were the kind of ideas you could not merely ignore but ridicule.often the founders themselves didnt know why their ideas were promising. they were attracted to these ideas by instinct because they were living in the future and they sensed that something was missing. but they could not have put into words exactly how their ugly ducklings were going to grow into big beautiful swans.most peoples first impulse when they hear about a lamesounding new startup idea is to make fun of it. even a lot of people who should know better.when i encounter a startup with a lamesounding idea i ask what microsoft is this the altair basic of now its a puzzle and the burden is on me to solve it. sometimes i cant think of an answer especially when the idea is a madeup one. but its remarkable how often there does turn out to be an answer. often its one the founders themselves hadnt seen yet.intriguingly there are sometimes multiple answers. i talked to a startup a few days ago that could grow into 3 distinct microsofts. theyd probably vary in size by orders of magnitude. but you can never predict how big a microsoft is going to be so in cases like that i encourage founders to follow whichever path is most immediately exciting to them. their instincts got them this far. why stop now

as i was deciding what to write about next i was surprised to find that two separate essays id been planning to write were actually the same.the first is about how to ace your y combinator interview. there has been so much nonsense written about this topic that ive been meaning for years to write something telling founders the truth.the second is about something politicians sometimes say  that the only way to become a billionaire is by exploiting people  and why this is mistaken.keep reading and youll learn both simultaneously.i know the politicians are mistaken because it was my job to predict which people will become billionaires. i think i can truthfully say that i know as much about how to do this as anyone. if the key to becoming a billionaire  the defining feature of billionaires  was to exploit people then i as a professional billionaire scout would surely realize this and look for people who would be good at it just as an nfl scout looks for speed in wide receivers.but aptitude for exploiting people is not what y combinator looks for at all. in fact its the opposite of what they look for. ill tell you what they do look for by explaining how to convince y combinator to fund you and you can see for yourself.what yc looks for above all is founders who understand some group of users and can make what they want. this is so important that its ycs motto make something people want.a big company can to some extent force unsuitable products on unwilling customers but a startup doesnt have the power to do that. a startup must sing for its supper by making things that genuinely delight its customers. otherwise it will never get off the ground.heres where things get difficult both for you as a founder and for the yc partners trying to decide whether to fund you. in a market economy its hard to make something people want that they dont already have. thats the great thing about market economies. if other people both knew about this need and were able to satisfy it they already would be and there would be no room for your startup.which means the conversation during your yc interview will have to be about something new either a new need or a new way to satisfy one. and not just new but uncertain. if it were certain that the need existed and that you could satisfy it that certainty would be reflected in large and rapidly growing revenues and you wouldnt be seeking seed funding.so the yc partners have to guess both whether youve discovered a real need and whether youll be able to satisfy it. thats what they are at least in this part of their job professional guessers. they have 1001 heuristics for doing this and im not going to tell you all of them but im happy to tell you the most important ones because these cant be faked the only way to hack them would be to do what you should be doing anyway as a founder.the first thing the partners will try to figure out usually is whether what youre making will ever be something a lot of people want. it doesnt have to be something a lot of people want now. the product and the market will both evolve and will influence each others evolution. but in the end there has to be something with a huge market. thats what the partners will be trying to figure out is there a path to a huge market 1sometimes its obvious there will be a huge market. if boom manages to ship an airliner at all international airlines will have to buy it. but usually its not obvious. usually the path to a huge market is by growing a small market. this idea is important enough that its worth coining a phrase for so lets call one of these small but growable markets a larval market.the perfect example of a larval market might be apples market when they were founded in 1976. in 1976 not many people wanted their own computer. but more and more started to want one till now every 10 year old on the planet wants a computer but calls it a phone.the ideal combination is the group of founders who are living in the future in the sense of being at the leading edge of some kind of change and who are building something they themselves want. most supersuccessful startups are of this type. steve wozniak wanted a computer. mark zuckerberg wanted to engage online with his college friends. larry and sergey wanted to find things on the web. all these founders were building things they and their peers wanted and the fact that they were at the leading edge of change meant that more people would want these things in the future.but although the ideal larval market is oneself and ones peers thats not the only kind. a larval market might also be regional for example. you build something to serve one location and then expand to others.the crucial feature of the initial market is that it exist. that may seem like an obvious point but the lack of it is the biggest flaw in most startup ideas. there have to be some people who want what youre building right now and want it so urgently that theyre willing to use it bugs and all even though youre a small company theyve never heard of. there dont have to be many but there have to be some. as long as you have some users there are straightforward ways to get more build new features they want seek out more people like them get them to refer you to their friends and so on. but these techniques all require some initial seed group of users.so this is one thing the yc partners will almost certainly dig into during your interview. who are your first users going to be and how do you know they want this if i had to decide whether to fund startups based on a single question it would be how do you know people want thisthe most convincing answer is because we and our friends want it. its even better when this is followed by the news that youve already built a prototype and even though its very crude your friends are using it and its spreading by word of mouth. if you can say that and youre not lying the partners will switch from default no to default yes. meaning youre in unless theres some other disqualifying flaw.that is a hard standard to meet though. airbnb didnt meet it. they had the first part. they had made something they themselves wanted. but it wasnt spreading. so dont feel bad if you dont hit this gold standard of convincingness. if airbnb didnt hit it it must be too high.in practice the yc partners will be satisfied if they feel that you have a deep understanding of your users needs. and the airbnbs did have that. they were able to tell us all about what motivated hosts and guests. they knew from firsthand experience because theyd been the first hosts. we couldnt ask them a question they didnt know the answer to. we ourselves were not very excited about the idea as users but we knew this didnt prove anything because there were lots of successful startups we hadnt been excited about as users. we were able to say to ourselves they seem to know what theyre talking about. maybe theyre onto something. its not growing yet but maybe they can figure out how to make it grow during yc. which they did about three weeks into the batch.the best thing you can do in a yc interview is to teach the partners about your users. so if you want to prepare for your interview one of the best ways to do it is to go talk to your users and find out exactly what theyre thinking. which is what you should be doing anyway.this may sound strangely credulous but the yc partners want to rely on the founders to tell them about the market. think about how vcs typically judge the potential market for an idea. theyre not ordinarily domain experts themselves so they forward the idea to someone who is and ask for their opinion. yc doesnt have time to do this but if the yc partners can convince themselves that the founders both a know what theyre talking about and b arent lying they dont need outside domain experts. they can use the founders themselves as domain experts when evaluating their own idea.this is why yc interviews arent pitches. to give as many founders as possible a chance to get funded we made interviews as short as we could 10 minutes. that is not enough time for the partners to figure out through the indirect evidence in a pitch whether you know what youre talking about and arent lying. they need to dig in and ask you questions. theres not enough time for sequential access. they need random access. 2the worst advice i ever heard about how to succeed in a yc interview is that you should take control of the interview and make sure to deliver the message you want to. in other words turn the interview into a pitch. elaborate expletive. it is so annoying when people try to do that. you ask them a question and instead of answering it they deliver some obviously prefabricated blob of pitch. it eats up 10 minutes really fast.there is no one who can give you accurate advice about what to do in a yc interview except a current or former yc partner. people whove merely been interviewed even successfully have no idea of this but interviews take all sorts of different forms depending on what the partners want to know about most. sometimes theyre all about the founders other times theyre all about the idea. sometimes some very narrow aspect of the idea. founders sometimes walk away from interviews complaining that they didnt get to explain their idea completely. true but they explained enough.since a yc interview consists of questions the way to do it well is to answer them well. part of that is answering them candidly. the partners dont expect you to know everything. but if you dont know the answer to a question dont try to bullshit your way out of it. the partners like most experienced investors are professional bullshit detectors and you are hopefully an amateur bullshitter. and if you try to bullshit them and fail they may not even tell you that you failed. so its better to be honest than to try to sell them. if you dont know the answer to a question say you dont and tell them how youd go about finding it or tell them the answer to some related question.if youre asked for example what could go wrong the worst possible answer is nothing. instead of convincing them that your idea is bulletproof this will convince them that youre a fool or a liar. far better to go into gruesome detail. thats what experts do when you ask what could go wrong. the partners know that your idea is risky. thats what a good bet looks like at this stage a tiny probability of a huge outcome.ditto if they ask about competitors. competitors are rarely what kills startups. poor execution does. but you should know who your competitors are and tell the yc partners candidly what your relative strengths and weaknesses are. because the yc partners know that competitors dont kill startups they wont hold competitors against you too much. they will however hold it against you if you seem either to be unaware of competitors or to be minimizing the threat they pose. they may not be sure whether youre clueless or lying but they dont need to be.the partners dont expect your idea to be perfect. this is seed investing. at this stage all they can expect are promising hypotheses. but they do expect you to be thoughtful and honest. so if trying to make your idea seem perfect causes you to come off as glib or clueless youve sacrificed something you needed for something you didnt.if the partners are sufficiently convinced that theres a path to a big market the next question is whether youll be able to find it. that in turn depends on three things the general qualities of the founders their specific expertise in this domain and the relationship between them. how determined are the founders are they good at building things are they resilient enough to keep going when things go wrong how strong is their friendshipthough the airbnbs only did ok in the idea department they did spectacularly well in this department. the story of how theyd funded themselves by making obama and mccainthemed breakfast cereal was the single most important factor in our decision to fund them. they didnt realize it at the time but what seemed to them an irrelevant story was in fact fabulously good evidence of their qualities as founders. it showed they were resourceful and determined and could work together.it wasnt just the cereal story that showed that though. the whole interview showed that they cared. they werent doing this just for the money or because startups were cool. the reason they were working so hard on this company was because it was their project. they had discovered an interesting new idea and they just couldnt let it go.mundane as it sounds thats the most powerful motivator of all not just in startups but in most ambitious undertakings to be genuinely interested in what youre building. this is what really drives billionaires or at least the ones who become billionaires from starting companies. the company is their project.one thing few people realize about billionaires is that all of them could have stopped sooner. they could have gotten acquired or found someone else to run the company. many founders do. the ones who become really rich are the ones who keep working. and what makes them keep working is not just money. what keeps them working is the same thing that keeps anyone else working when they could stop if they wanted to that theres nothing else theyd rather do.that not exploiting people is the defining quality of people who become billionaires from starting companies. so thats what yc looks for in founders authenticity. peoples motives for starting startups are usually mixed. theyre usually doing it from some combination of the desire to make money the desire to seem cool genuine interest in the problem and unwillingness to work for someone else. the last two are more powerful motivators than the first two. its ok for founders to want to make money or to seem cool. most do. but if the founders seem like theyre doing it just to make money or just to seem cool theyre not likely to succeed on a big scale. the founders who are doing it for the money will take the first sufficiently large acquisition offer and the ones who are doing it to seem cool will rapidly discover that there are much less painful ways of seeming cool. 3y combinator certainly sees founders whose m.o. is to exploit people. yc is a magnet for them because they want the yc brand. but when the yc partners detect someone like that they reject them. if bad people made good founders the yc partners would face a moral dilemma. fortunately they dont because bad people make bad founders. this exploitative type of founder is not going to succeed on a large scale and in fact probably wont even succeed on a small one because theyre always going to be taking shortcuts. they see yc itself as a shortcut.their exploitation usually begins with their own cofounders which is disastrous since the cofounders relationship is the foundation of the company. then it moves on to the users which is also disastrous because the sort of early adopters a successful startup wants as its initial users are the hardest to fool. the best this kind of founder can hope for is to keep the edifice of deception tottering along until some acquirer can be tricked into buying it. but that kind of acquisition is never very big. 4if professional billionaire scouts know that exploiting people is not the skill to look for why do some politicians think this is the defining quality of billionairesi think they start from the feeling that its wrong that one person could have so much more money than another. its understandable where that feeling comes from. its in our dna and even in the dna of other species.if they limited themselves to saying that it made them feel bad when one person had so much more money than other people who would disagree it makes me feel bad too and i think people who make a lot of money have a moral obligation to use it for the common good. the mistake they make is to jump from feeling bad that some people are much richer than others to the conclusion that theres no legitimate way to make a very large amount of money. now were getting into statements that are not only falsifiable but false.there are certainly some people who become rich by doing bad things. but there are also plenty of people who behave badly and dont make that much from it. there is no correlation  in fact probably an inverse correlation  between how badly you behave and how much money you make.the greatest danger of this nonsense may not even be that it sends policy astray but that it misleads ambitious people. can you imagine a better way to destroy social mobility than by telling poor kids that the way to get rich is by exploiting people while the rich kids know from having watched the preceding generation do it how its really doneill tell you how its really done so you can at least tell your own kids the truth. its all about users. the most reliable way to become a billionaire is to start a company that grows fast and the way to grow fast is to make what users want. newly started startups have no choice but to delight users or theyll never even get rolling. but this never stops being the lodestar and bigger companies take their eye off it at their peril. stop delighting users and eventually someone else will.users are what the partners want to know about in yc interviews and what i want to know about when i talk to founders that we funded ten years ago and who are billionaires now. what do users want what new things could you build for them founders whove become billionaires are always eager to talk about that topic. thats how they became billionaires.notes1 the yc partners have so much practice doing this that they sometimes see paths that the founders themselves havent seen yet. the partners dont try to seem skeptical as buyers in transactions often do to increase their leverage. although the founders feel their job is to convince the partners of the potential of their idea these roles are not infrequently reversed and the founders leave the interview feeling their idea has more potential than they realized.2 in practice 7 minutes would be enough. you rarely change your mind at minute 8. but 10 minutes is socially convenient.3 i myself took the first sufficiently large acquisition offer in my first startup so i dont blame founders for doing this. theres nothing wrong with starting a startup to make money. you need to make money somehow and for some people startups are the most efficient way to do it. im just saying that these are not the startups that get really big.4 not these days anyway. there were some big ones during the internet bubble and indeed some big ipos.

what should one do that may seem a strange question but its not meaningless or unanswerable. its the sort of question kids ask before they learn not to ask big questions. i only came across it myself in the process of investigating something else. but once i did i thought i should at least try to answer it.so what should one do one should help people and take care of the world. those two are obvious. but is there anything else when i ask that the answer that pops up is make good new things.i cant prove that one should do this any more than i can prove that one should help people or take care of the world. were talking about first principles here. but i can explain why this principle makes sense. the most impressive thing humans can do is to think. it may be the most impressive thing that can be done. and the best kind of thinking or more precisely the best proof that one has thought well is to make good new things.i mean new things in a very general sense. newtons physics was a good new thing. indeed the first version of this principle was to have good new ideas. but that didnt seem general enough it didnt include making art or music for example except insofar as they embody new ideas. and while they may embody new ideas thats not all they embody unless you stretch the word idea so uselessly thin that it includes everything that goes through your nervous system.even for ideas that one has consciously though i prefer the phrasing make good new things. there are other ways to describe the best kind of thinking. to make discoveries for example or to understand something more deeply than others have. but how well do you understand something if you cant make a model of it or write about it indeed trying to express what you understand is not just a way to prove that you understand it but a way to understand it better.another reason i like this phrasing is that it biases us toward creation. it causes us to prefer the kind of ideas that are naturally seen as making things rather than say making critical observations about things other people have made. those are ideas too and sometimes valuable ones but its easy to trick oneself into believing theyre more valuable than they are. criticism seems sophisticated and making new things often seems awkward especially at first and yet its precisely those first steps that are most rare and valuable.is newness essential i think so. obviously its essential in science. if you copied a paper of someone elses and published it as your own it would seem not merely unimpressive but dishonest. and its similar in the arts. a copy of a good painting can be a pleasing thing but its not impressive in the way the original was. which in turn implies its not impressive to make the same thing over and over however well youre just copying yourself.note though that were talking about a different kind of should with this principle. taking care of people and the world are shoulds in the sense that theyre ones duty but making good new things is a should in the sense that this is how to live to ones full potential. historically most rules about how to live have been a mix of both kinds of should though usually with more of the former than the latter. 1for most of history the question what should one do got much the same answer everywhere whether you asked cicero or confucius. you should be wise brave honest temperate and just uphold tradition and serve the public interest. there was a long stretch where in some parts of the world the answer became serve god but in practice it was still considered good to be wise brave honest temperate and just uphold tradition and serve the public interest. and indeed this recipe would have seemed right to most victorians. but theres nothing in it about taking care of the world or making new things and thats a bit worrying because it seems like this question should be a timeless one. the answer shouldnt change much.im not too worried that the traditional answers dont mention taking care of the world. obviously people only started to care about that once it became clear we could ruin it. but how can making good new things be important if the traditional answers dont mention itthe traditional answers were answers to a slightly different question. they were answers to the question of how to be rather than what to do. the audience didnt have a lot of choice about what to do. the audience up till recent centuries was the landowning class which was also the political class. they werent choosing between doing physics and writing novels. their work was foreordained manage their estates participate in politics fight when necessary. it was ok to do certain other kinds of work in ones spare time but ideally one didnt have any. ciceros de officiis is one of the great classical answers to the question of how to live and in it he explicitly says that he wouldnt even be writing it if he hadnt been excluded from public life by recent political upheavals. 2there were of course people doing what we would now call original work and they were often admired for it but they werent seen as models. archimedes knew that he was the first to prove that a sphere has 23 the volume of the smallest enclosing cylinder and was very pleased about it. but you dont find ancient writers urging their readers to emulate him. they regarded him more as a prodigy than a model.now many more of us can follow archimedess example and devote most of our attention to one kind of work. he turned out to be a model after all along with a collection of other people that his contemporaries would have found it strange to treat as a distinct group because the vein of people making new things ran at right angles to the social hierarchy.what kinds of new things count id rather leave that question to the makers of them. it would be a risky business to try to define any kind of threshold because new kinds of work are often despised at first. raymond chandler was writing literal pulp fiction and hes now recognized as one of the best writers of the twentieth century. indeed this pattern is so common that you can use it as a recipe if youre excited about some kind of work thats not considered prestigious and you can explain what everyone else is overlooking about it then this is not merely a kind of work thats ok to do but one to seek out.the other reason i wouldnt want to define any thresholds is that we dont need them. the kind of people who make good new things dont need rules to keep them honest.so theres my guess at a set of principles to live by take care of people and the world and make good new things. different people will do these to varying degrees. there will presumably be lots who focus entirely on taking care of people. there will be a few who focus mostly on making new things. but even if youre one of those you should at least make sure that the new things you make dont net harm people or the world. and if you go a step further and try to make things that help them you may find youre ahead on the trade. youll be more constrained in what you can make but youll make it with more energy.on the other hand if you make something amazing youll often be helping people or the world even if you didnt mean to. newton was driven by curiosity and ambition not by any practical effect his work might have and yet the practical effect of his work has been enormous. and this seems the rule rather than the exception. so if you think you can make something amazing you should probably just go ahead and do it.notes1 we could treat all three as the same kind of should by saying that its ones duty to live well  for example by saying as some christians have that its ones duty to make the most of ones godgiven gifts. but this seems one of those casuistries people invented to evade the stern requirements of religion it was permissible to spend time studying math instead of praying or performing acts of charity because otherwise you were rejecting a gift god had given you. a useful casuistry no doubt but we dont need it.we could also combine the first two principles since people are part of the world. why should our species get special treatment i wont try to justify this choice but im skeptical that anyone who claims to think differently actually lives according to their principles.2 confucius was also excluded from public life after ending up on the losing end of a power struggle and presumably he too would not be so famous now if it hadnt been for this long stretch of enforced leisure.

the secret curse of the nonprofit world is restricted donations. if you havent been involved with nonprofits you may never have heard this phrase before. but if you have been it probably made you wince.restricted donations mean donations where the donor limits what can be done with the money. this is common with big donations perhaps the default. and yet its usually a bad idea. usually the way the donor wants the money spent is not the way the nonprofit would have chosen. otherwise there would have been no need to restrict the donation. but who has a better understanding of where money needs to be spent the nonprofit or the donorif a nonprofit doesnt understand better than its donors where money needs to be spent then its incompetent and you shouldnt be donating to it at all.which means a restricted donation is inherently suboptimal. its either a donation to a bad nonprofit or a donation for the wrong things.there are a couple exceptions to this principle. one is when the nonprofit is an umbrella organization. its reasonable to make a restricted donation to a university for example because a university is only nominally a single nonprofit. another exception is when the donor actually does know as much as the nonprofit about where money needs to be spent. the gates foundation for example has specific goals and often makes restricted donations to individual nonprofits to accomplish them. but unless youre a domain expert yourself or donating to an umbrella organization your donation would do more good if it were unrestricted.if restricted donations do less good than unrestricted ones why do donors so often make them partly because doing good isnt donors only motive. they often have other motives as well  to make a mark or to generate good publicity 1 or to comply with regulations or corporate policies. many donors may simply never have considered the distinction between restricted and unrestricted donations. they may believe that donating money for some specific purpose is just how donation works. and to be fair nonprofits dont try very hard to discourage such illusions. they cant afford to. people running nonprofits are almost always anxious about money. they cant afford to talk back to big donors.you cant expect candor in a relationship so asymmetric. so ill tell you what nonprofits wish they could tell you. if you want to donate to a nonprofit donate unrestricted. if you trust them to spend your money trust them to decide how.note1 unfortunately restricted donations tend to generate more publicity than unrestricted ones. x donates money to build a school in africa is not only more interesting than x donates money to y nonprofit to spend as y chooses but also focuses more attention on x.

an essay has to tell people something they dont already know. but there are three different reasons people might not know something and they yield three very different kinds of essays.one reason people wont know something is if its not important to know. that doesnt mean it will make a bad essay. for example you might write a good essay about a particular model of car. readers would learn something from it. it would add to their picture of the world. for a handful of readers it might even spur some kind of epiphany. but unless this is a very unusual car its not critical for everyone to know about it. 1if something isnt important to know theres no answer to the question of why people dont know it. not knowing random facts is the default. but if youre going to write about things that are important to know you have to ask why your readers dont already know them. is it because theyre smart but inexperienced or because theyre obtuseso the three reasons readers might not already know what you tell them are a that its not important b that theyre obtuse or c that theyre inexperienced.the reason i did this breakdown was to get at the following fact which might have seemed controversial if id led with it but should be obvious now. if youre writing for smart people about important things youre writing for the young.or more precisely thats where youll have the most effect. whatever you say should also be at least somewhat novel to you however old you are. its not an essay otherwise because an essay is something you write to figure something out. but whatever you figure out will presumably be more of a surprise to younger readers than it is to you.theres a continuum of surprise. at one extreme something you read can change your whole way of thinking. the selfish gene did this to me. it was like suddenly seeing the other interpretation of an ambiguous image you can treat genes rather than organisms as the protagonists and evolution becomes easier to understand when you do. at the other extreme writing merely puts into words something readers were already thinking  or thought they were.the impact of an essay is how much it changes readers thinking multiplied by the importance of the topic. but its hard to do well at both. its hard to have big new ideas about important topics. so in practice theres a tradeoff you can change readers thinking a lot about moderately important things or change it a little about very important ones. but with younger readers the tradeoff shifts. theres more room to change their thinking so theres a bigger payoff for writing about important things.the tradeoff isnt a conscious one at least not for me. its more like a kind of gravitational field that writers work in. but every essayist works in it whether they realize it or not.this seems obvious once you state it but it took me a long time to understand. i knew i wanted to write for smart people about important topics. i noticed empirically that i seemed to be writing for the young. but it took me years to understand that the latter was an automatic consequence of the former. in fact i only really figured it out as i was writing this essay.now that i know it should i change anything i dont think so. in fact seeing the shape of the field that writers work in has reminded me that im not optimizing for returns in it. im not trying to surprise readers of any particular age im trying to surprise myself.the way i usually decide what to write about is by following curiosity. i notice something new and dig into it. it would probably be a mistake to change that. but seeing the shape of the essay field has set me thinking. what would surprise young readers which important things do people tend to learn late interesting question. i should think about that.

most people think of nerds as quiet diffident people. in ordinary social situations they are  as quiet and diffident as the star quarterback would be if he found himself in the middle of a physics symposium. and for the same reason they are fish out of water. but the apparent diffidence of nerds is an illusion due to the fact that when nonnerds observe them its usually in ordinary social situations. in fact some nerds are quite fierce.the fierce nerds are a small but interesting group. they are as a rule extremely competitive  more competitive id say than highly competitive nonnerds. competition is more personal for them. partly perhaps because theyre not emotionally mature enough to distance themselves from it but also because theres less randomness in the kinds of competition they engage in and they are thus more justified in taking the results personally.fierce nerds also tend to be somewhat overconfident especially when young. it might seem like it would be a disadvantage to be mistaken about ones abilities but empirically it isnt. up to a point confidence is a selffullfilling prophecy.another quality you find in most fierce nerds is intelligence. not all nerds are smart but the fierce ones are always at least moderately so. if they werent they wouldnt have the confidence to be fierce. 1theres also a natural connection between nerdiness and independentmindedness. its hard to be independentminded without being somewhat socially awkward because conventional beliefs are so often mistaken or at least arbitrary. no one who was both independentminded and ambitious would want to waste the effort it takes to fit in. and the independentmindedness of the fierce nerds will obviously be of the aggressive rather than the passive type theyll be annoyed by rules rather than dreamily unaware of them.im less sure why fierce nerds are impatient but most seem to be. you notice it first in conversation where they tend to interrupt you. this is merely annoying but in the more promising fierce nerds its connected to a deeper impatience about solving problems. perhaps the competitiveness and impatience of fierce nerds are not separate qualities but two manifestations of a single underlying drivenness.when you combine all these qualities in sufficient quantities the result is quite formidable. the most vivid example of fierce nerds in action may be james watsons the double helix. the first sentence of the book is i have never seen francis crick in a modest mood and the portrait he goes on to paint of crick is the quintessential fierce nerd brilliant socially awkward competitive independentminded overconfident. but so is the implicit portrait he paints of himself. indeed his lack of social awareness makes both portraits that much more realistic because he baldly states all sorts of opinions and motivations that a smoother person would conceal. and moreover its clear from the story that crick and watsons fierce nerdiness was integral to their success. their independentmindedness caused them to consider approaches that most others ignored their overconfidence allowed them to work on problems they only half understood they were literally described as clowns by one eminent insider and their impatience and competitiveness got them to the answer ahead of two other groups that would otherwise have found it within the next year if not the next several months. 2the idea that there could be fierce nerds is an unfamiliar one not just to many normal people but even to some young nerds. especially early on nerds spend so much of their time in ordinary social situations and so little doing real work that they get a lot more evidence of their awkwardness than their power. so there will be some who read this description of the fierce nerd and realize hmm thats me. and it is to you young fierce nerd that i now turn.i have some good news and some bad news. the good news is that your fierceness will be a great help in solving difficult problems. and not just the kind of scientific and technical problems that nerds have traditionally solved. as the world progresses the number of things you can win at by getting the right answer increases. recently getting rich became one of them 7 of the 8 richest people in america are now fierce nerds.indeed being a fierce nerd is probably even more helpful in business than in nerds original territory of scholarship. fierceness seems optional there. darwin for example doesnt seem to have been especially fierce. whereas its impossible to be the ceo of a company over a certain size without being fierce so now that nerds can win at business fierce nerds will increasingly monopolize the really big successes.the bad news is that if its not exercised your fierceness will turn to bitterness and you will become an intellectual playground bully the grumpy sysadmin the forum troll the hater the shooter down of new ideas.how do you avoid this fate work on ambitious projects. if you succeed it will bring you a kind of satisfaction that neutralizes bitterness. but you dont need to have succeeded to feel this merely working on hard projects gives most fierce nerds some feeling of satisfaction. and those it doesnt it at least keeps busy. 3another solution may be to somehow turn off your fierceness by devoting yourself to meditation or psychotherapy or something like that. maybe thats the right answer for some people. i have no idea. but it doesnt seem the optimal solution to me. if youre given a sharp knife it seems to me better to use it than to blunt its edge to avoid cutting yourself.if you do choose the ambitious route youll have a tailwind behind you. there has never been a better time to be a nerd. in the past century weve seen a continuous transfer of power from dealmakers to technicians  from the charismatic to the competent  and i dont see anything on the horizon that will end it. at least not till the nerds end it themselves by bringing about the singularity.notes1 to be a nerd is to be socially awkward and there are two distinct ways to do that to be playing the same game as everyone else but badly and to be playing a different game. the smart nerds are the latter type.2 the same qualities that make fierce nerds so effective can also make them very annoying. fierce nerds would do well to remember this and a try to keep a lid on it and b seek out organizations and types of work where getting the right answer matters more than preserving social harmony. in practice that means small groups working on hard problems. which fortunately is the most fun kind of environment anyway.3 if success neutralizes bitterness why are there some people who are at least moderately successful and yet still quite bitter because peoples potential bitterness varies depending on how naturally bitter their personality is and how ambitious they are someone whos naturally very bitter will still have a lot left after success neutralizes some of it and someone whos very ambitious will need proportionally more success to satisfy that ambition.so the worstcase scenario is someone whos both naturally bitter and extremely ambitious and yet only moderately successful.

there are two senses in which writing can be good it can sound good and the ideas can be right. it can have nice flowing sentences and it can draw correct conclusions about important things. it might seem as if these two kinds of good would be unrelated like the speed of a car and the color its painted. and yet i dont think they are. i think writing that sounds good is more likely to be right.so here we have the most exciting kind of idea one that seems both preposterous and true. lets examine it. how can this possibly be truei know its true from writing. you cant simultaneously optimize two unrelated things when you push one far enough you always end up sacrificing the other. and yet no matter how hard i push i never find myself having to choose between the sentence that sounds best and the one that expresses an idea best. if i did it would be frivolous to care how sentences sound. but in practice it feels the opposite of frivolous. fixing sentences that sound bad seems to help get the ideas right. 1by right i mean more than just true. getting the ideas right means developing them well  drawing the conclusions that matter most and exploring each one to the right level of detail. so getting the ideas right is not just a matter of saying true things but saying the right true things.how could trying to make sentences sound good help you do that the clue to the answer is something i noticed 30 years ago when i was doing the layout for my first book. sometimes when youre laying out text you have bad luck. for example you get a section that runs one line longer than the page. i dont know what ordinary typesetters do in this situation but what i did was rewrite the section to make it a line shorter. youd expect such an arbitrary constraint to make the writing worse. but i found to my surprise that it never did. i always ended up with something i liked better.i dont think this was because my writing was especially careless. i think if you pointed to a random paragraph in anything written by anyone and told them to make it slightly shorter or longer theyd probably be able to come up with something better.the best analogy for this phenomenon is when you shake a bin full of different objects. the shakes are arbitrary motions. or more precisely theyre not calculated to make any two specific objects fit more closely together. and yet repeated shaking inevitably makes the objects discover brilliantly clever ways of packing themselves. gravity wont let them become less tightly packed so any change has to be a change for the better. 2so it is with writing. if you have to rewrite an awkward passage youll never do it in a way that makes it less true. you couldnt bear it any more than gravity could bear things floating upward. so any change in the ideas has to be a change for the better.its obvious once you think about it. writing that sounds good is more likely to be right for the same reason that a wellshaken bin is more likely to be tightly packed. but theres something else going on as well. sounding good isnt just a random external force that leaves the ideas in an essay better off. it actually helps you to get them right.the reason is that it makes the essay easier to read. its less work to read writing that flows well. how does that help the writer because the writer is the first reader. when im working on an essay i spend far more time reading than writing. ill reread some parts 50 or 100 times replaying the thoughts in them and asking myself like someone sanding a piece of wood does anything catch does anything feel wrong and the easier the essay is to read the easier it is to notice if something catches.so yes the two senses of good writing are connected in at least two ways. trying to make writing sound good makes you fix mistakes unconsciously and also helps you fix them consciously it shakes the bin of ideas and also makes mistakes easier to see. but now that weve dissolved one layer of preposterousness i cant resist adding another. does sounding good do more than just help you get the ideas right is writing that sounds good inherently more likely to be right crazy as it may seem i think thats true too.obviously theres a connection at the level of individual words. there are lots of words in english that sound like what they mean often in wonderfully subtle ways. glitter. round. scrape. prim. cavalcade. but the sound of good writing depends even more on the way you put words together and theres a connection at that level too.when writing sounds good its mostly because it has good rhythm. but the rhythm of good writing is not the rhythm of music or the meter of verse. its not so regular. if it were it wouldnt be good because the rhythm of good writing has to match the ideas in it and ideas have all kinds of different shapes. sometimes theyre simple and you just state them. but other times theyre more subtle and you need longer more complicated sentences to tease out all the implications.an essay is a cleaned up train of thought in the same way dialogue is cleaned up conversation and a train of thought has a natural rhythm. so when an essay sounds good its not merely because it has a pleasing rhythm but because it has its natural one. which means you can use getting the rhythm right as a heuristic for getting the ideas right. and not just in principle good writers do both simultaneously as a matter of course. often i dont even distinguish between the two problems. i just think ugh this doesnt sound right what do i mean to say here 3the sound of writing turns out to be more like the shape of a plane than the color of a car. if it looks good as kelly johnson used to say it will fly well.this is only true of writing thats used to develop ideas though. it doesnt apply when you have ideas in some other way and then write about them afterward  for example if you build something or conduct an experiment and then write a paper about it. in such cases the ideas often live more in the work than the writing so the writing can be bad even though the ideas are good. the writing in textbooks and popular surveys can be bad for the same reason the author isnt developing the ideas merely describing other peoples. its only when youre writing to develop ideas that theres such a close connection between the two senses of doing it well.ok many people will be thinking this seems plausible so far but what about liars is it not notoriously possible for a smoothtongued liar to write something beautiful thats completely falseit is of course. but not without method acting. the way to write something beautiful and false is to begin by making yourself almost believe it. so just like someone writing something beautiful and true youre presenting a perfectlyformed train of thought. the difference is the point where it attaches to the world. youre saying something that would be true if certain false premises were. if for some bizarre reason the number of jobs in a country were fixed then immigrants really would be taking our jobs.so its not quite right to say that better sounding writing is more likely to be true. better sounding writing is more likely to be internally consistent. if the writer is honest internal consistency and truth converge.but while we cant safely conclude that beautiful writing is true its usually safe to conclude the converse something that seems clumsily written will usually have gotten the ideas wrong too.indeed the two senses of good writing are more like two ends of the same thing. the connection between them is not a rigid one the goodness of good writing is not a rod but a rope with multiple overlapping connections running through it. but its hard to move one end without moving the other. its hard to be right without sounding right.notes1 the closest thing to an exception is when you have to go back and insert a new point into the middle of something youve written. this often messes up the flow sometimes in ways you can never quite repair. but i think the ultimate source of this problem is that ideas are treeshaped and essays are linear. you inevitably run into difficulties when you try to cram the former into the latter. frankly its surprising how much you can get away with. but even so you sometimes have to resort to an endnote.2 obviously if you shake the bin hard enough the objects in it can become less tightly packed. and similarly if you imposed some huge external constraint on your writing like using alternating one and two syllable words the ideas would start to suffer.3 bizarrely enough this happened in the writing of this very paragraph. an earlier version shared several phrases in common with the preceding paragraph and the repetition bugged me each time i reread it. when i got annoyed enough to fix it i discovered that the repetition reflected a problem in the underlying ideas and i fixed both simultaneously.s

march 2024this is a talk i gave to 14 and 15 year olds about what to do now if they might want to start a startup later. lots of schools think they should tell students something about startups. this is what i think they should tell them.most of you probably think that when youre released into the socalled real world youll eventually have to get some kind of job. thats not true and today im going to talk about a trick you can use to avoid ever having to get a job.the trick is to start your own company. so its not a trick for avoiding work because if you start your own company youll work harder than you would if you had an ordinary job. but you will avoid many of the annoying things that come with a job including a boss telling you what to do.its more exciting to work on your own project than someone elses. and you can also get a lot richer. in fact this is the standard way to get really rich. if you look at the lists of the richest people that occasionally get published in the press nearly all of them did it by starting their own companies.starting your own company can mean anything from starting a barber shop to starting google. im here to talk about one extreme end of that continuum. im going to tell you how to start google.the companies at the google end of the continuum are called startups when theyre young. the reason i know about them is that my wife jessica and i started something called y combinator that is basically a startup factory. since 2005 y combinator has funded over 4000 startups. so we know exactly what you need to start a startup because weve helped people do it for the last 19 years.you might have thought i was joking when i said i was going to tell you how to start google. you might be thinking how could we start google but thats effectively what the people who did start google were thinking before they started it. if youd told larry page and sergey brin the founders of google that the company they were about to start would one day be worth over a trillion dollars their heads would have exploded.all you can know when you start working on a startup is that it seems worth pursuing. you cant know whether it will turn into a company worth billions or one that goes out of business. so when i say im going to tell you how to start google i mean im going to tell you how to get to the point where you can start a company that has as much chance of being google as google had of being google. 1how do you get from where you are now to the point where you can start a successful startup you need three things. you need to be good at some kind of technology you need an idea for what youre going to build and you need cofounders to start the company with.how do you get good at technology and how do you choose which technology to get good at both of those questions turn out to have the same answer work on your own projects. dont try to guess whether gene editing or llms or rockets will turn out to be the most valuable technology to know about. no one can predict that. just work on whatever interests you the most. youll work much harder on something youre interested in than something youre doing because you think youre supposed to.if youre not sure what technology to get good at get good at programming. that has been the source of the median startup for the last 30 years and this is probably not going to change in the next 10.those of you who are taking computer science classes in school may at this point be thinking ok weve got this sorted. were already being taught all about programming. but sorry this is not enough. you have to be working on your own projects not just learning stuff in classes. you can do well in computer science classes without ever really learning to program. in fact you can graduate with a degree in computer science from a top university and still not be any good at programming. thats why tech companies all make you take a coding test before theyll hire you regardless of where you went to university or how well you did there. they know grades and exam results prove nothing.if you really want to learn to program you have to work on your own projects. you learn so much faster that way. imagine youre writing a game and theres something you want to do in it and you dont know how. youre going to figure out how a lot faster than youd learn anything in a class.you dont have to learn programming though. if youre wondering what counts as technology it includes practically everything you could describe using the words make or build. so welding would count or making clothes or making videos. whatever youre most interested in. the critical distinction is whether youre producing or just consuming. are you writing computer games or just playing them thats the cutoff.steve jobs the founder of apple spent time when he was a teenager studying calligraphy  the sort of beautiful writing that you see in medieval manuscripts. no one including him thought that this would help him in his career. he was just doing it because he was interested in it. but it turned out to help him a lot. the computer that made apple really big the macintosh came out at just the moment when computers got powerful enough to make letters like the ones in printed books instead of the computerylooking letters you see in 8 bit games. apple destroyed everyone else at this and one reason was that steve was one of the few people in the computer business who really got graphic design.dont feel like your projects have to be serious. they can be as frivolous as you like so long as youre building things youre excited about. probably 90 of programmers start out building games. they and their friends like to play games. so they build the kind of things they and their friends want. and thats exactly what you should be doing at 15 if you want to start a startup one day.you dont have to do just one project. in fact its good to learn about multiple things. steve jobs didnt just learn calligraphy. he also learned about electronics which was even more valuable. whatever youre interested in. do you notice a theme hereso thats the first of the three things you need to get good at some kind or kinds of technology. you do it the same way you get good at the violin or football practice. if you start a startup at 22 and you start writing your own programs now then by the time you start the company youll have spent at least 7 years practicing writing code and you can get pretty good at anything after practicing it for 7 years.lets suppose youre 22 and youve succeeded youre now really good at some technology. how do you get startup ideas it might seem like thats the hard part. even if you are a good programmer how do you get the idea to start googleactually its easy to get startup ideas once youre good at technology. once youre good at some technology when you look at the world you see dotted outlines around the things that are missing. you start to be able to see both the things that are missing from the technology itself and all the broken things that could be fixed using it and each one of these is a potential startup.in the town near our house theres a shop with a sign warning that the door is hard to close. the sign has been there for several years. to the people in the shop it must seem like this mysterious natural phenomenon that the door sticks and all they can do is put up a sign warning customers about it. but any carpenter looking at this situation would think why dont you just plane off the part that sticksonce youre good at programming all the missing software in the world starts to become as obvious as a sticking door to a carpenter. ill give you a real world example. back in the 20th century american universities used to publish printed directories with all the students names and contact info. when i tell you what these directories were called youll know which startup im talking about. they were called facebooks because they usually had a picture of each student next to their name.so mark zuckerberg shows up at harvard in 2002 and the university still hasnt gotten the facebook online. each individual house has an online facebook but there isnt one for the whole university. the university administration has been diligently having meetings about this and will probably have solved the problem in another decade or so. most of the students dont consciously notice that anything is wrong. but mark is a programmer. he looks at this situation and thinks well this is stupid. i could write a program to fix this in one night. just let people upload their own photos and then combine the data into a new site for the whole university. so he does. and almost literally overnight he has thousands of users.of course facebook was not a startup yet. it was just a... project. theres that word again. projects arent just the best way to learn about technology. theyre also the best source of startup ideas.facebook was not unusual in this respect. apple and google also began as projects. apple wasnt meant to be a company. steve wozniak just wanted to build his own computer. it only turned into a company when steve jobs said hey i wonder if we could sell plans for this computer to other people. thats how apple started. they werent even selling computers just plans for computers. can you imagine how lame this company seemedditto for google. larry and sergey werent trying to start a company at first. they were just trying to make search better. before google most search engines didnt try to sort the results they gave you in order of importance. if you searched for rugby they just gave you every web page that contained the word rugby. and the web was so small in 1997 that this actually worked kind of. there might only be 20 or 30 pages with the word rugby but the web was growing exponentially which meant this way of doing search was becoming exponentially more broken. most users just thought wow i sure have to look through a lot of search results to find what i want. door sticks. but like mark larry and sergey were programmers. like mark they looked at this situation and thought well this is stupid. some pages about rugby matter more than others. lets figure out which those are and show them first.its obvious in retrospect that this was a great idea for a startup. it wasnt obvious at the time. its never obvious. if it was obviously a good idea to start apple or google or facebook someone else would have already done it. thats why the best startups grow out of projects that arent meant to be startups. youre not trying to start a company. youre just following your instincts about whats interesting. and if youre young and good at technology then your unconscious instincts about whats interesting are better than your conscious ideas about what would be a good company.so its critical if youre a young founder to build things for yourself and your friends to use. the biggest mistake young founders make is to build something for some mysterious group of other people. but if you can make something that you and your friends truly want to use  something your friends arent just using out of loyalty to you but would be really sad to lose if you shut it down  then you almost certainly have the germ of a good startup idea. it may not seem like a startup to you. it may not be obvious how to make money from it. but trust me theres a way.what you need in a startup idea and all you need is something your friends actually want. and those ideas arent hard to see once youre good at technology. there are sticking doors everywhere. 2now for the third and final thing you need a cofounder or cofounders. the optimal startup has two or three founders so you need one or two cofounders. how do you find them can you predict what im going to say next its the same thing projects. you find cofounders by working on projects with them. what you need in a cofounder is someone whos good at what they do and that you work well with and the only way to judge this is to work with them on things.at this point im going to tell you something you might not want to hear. it really matters to do well in your classes even the ones that are just memorization or blathering about literature because you need to do well in your classes to get into a good university. and if you want to start a startup you should try to get into the best university you can because thats where the best cofounders are. its also where the best employees are. when larry and sergey started google they began by just hiring all the smartest people they knew out of stanford and this was a real advantage for them.the empirical evidence is clear on this. if you look at where the largest numbers of successful startups come from its pretty much the same as the list of the most selective universities.i dont think its the prestigious names of these universities that cause more good startups to come out of them. nor do i think its because the quality of the teaching is better. whats driving this is simply the difficulty of getting in. you have to be pretty smart and determined to get into mit or cambridge so if you do manage to get in youll find the other students include a lot of smart and determined people. 3you dont have to start a startup with someone you meet at university. the founders of twitch met when they were seven. the founders of stripe patrick and john collison met when john was born. but universities are the main source of cofounders. and because theyre where the cofounders are theyre also where the ideas are because the best ideas grow out of projects you do with the people who become your cofounders.so the list of what you need to do to get from here to starting a startup is quite short. you need to get good at technology and the way to do that is to work on your own projects. and you need to do as well in school as you can so you can get into a good university because thats where the cofounders and the ideas are.thats it just two things build stuff and do well in school.notes1 the rhetorical trick in this sentence is that the googles refer to different things. what i mean is a company that has as much chance of growing as big as google ultimately did as larry and sergey could have reasonably expected google itself would at the time they started it. but i think the original version is zippier.2 making something for your friends isnt the only source of startup ideas. its just the best source for young founders who have the least knowledge of what other people want and whose own wants are most predictive of future demand.3 strangely enough this is particularly true in countries like the us where undergraduate admissions are done badly. us admissions departments make applicants jump through a lot of arbitrary hoops that have little to do with their intellectual ability. but the more arbitrary a test the more it becomes a test of mere determination and resourcefulness. and those are the two most important qualities in startup founders. so us admissions departments are better at selecting founders than they would be if they were better at selecting students.

few people are capable of expressing with equanimity opinions which differ from the prejudices of their social environment. most people are even incapable of forming such opinions. einsteinthere has been a lot of talk about privilege lately. although the concept is overused there is something to it and in particular to the idea that privilege makes you blind  that you cant see things that are visible to someone whose life is very different from yours.but one of the most pervasive examples of this kind of blindness is one that i havent seen mentioned explicitly. im going to call it orthodox privilege the more conventionalminded someone is the more it seems to them that its safe for everyone to express their opinions.its safe for them to express their opinions because the source of their opinions is whatever its currently acceptable to believe. so it seems to them that it must be safe for everyone. they literally cant imagine a true statement that would get you in trouble.and yet at every point in history there were true things that would get you in trouble to say. is ours the first where this isnt so what an amazing coincidence that would be.surely it should at least be the default assumption that our time is not unique and that there are true things you cant say now just as there have always been. you would think. but even in the face of such overwhelming historical evidence most people will go with their gut on this one.in the most extreme cases people suffering from orthodox privilege will not only deny that theres anything true that you cant say but will accuse you of heresy merely for saying there is. though if theres more than one heresy current in your time these accusations will be weirdly nondeterministic you must either be an xist or a yist.frustrating as it is to deal with these people its important to realize that theyre in earnest. theyre not pretending they think its impossible for an idea to be both unorthodox and true. the world really looks that way to them.indeed this is a uniquely tenacious form of privilege. people can overcome the blindness induced by most forms of privilege by learning more about whatever theyre not. but they cant overcome orthodox privilege just by learning more. theyd have to become more independentminded. if that happens at all it doesnt happen on the time scale of one conversation.it may be possible to convince some people that orthodox privilege must exist even though they cant sense it just as one can with say dark matter. there may be some who could be convinced for example that its very unlikely that this is the first point in history at which theres nothing true you cant say even if they cant imagine specific examples.but in general i dont think it will work to say check your privilege about this type of privilege because those in its demographic dont realize theyre in it. it doesnt seem to conventionalminded people that theyre conventionalminded. it just seems to them that theyre right. indeed they tend to be particularly sure of it.perhaps the solution is to appeal to politeness. if someone says they can hear a highpitched noise that you cant its only polite to take them at their word instead of demanding evidence thats impossible to produce or simply denying that they hear anything. imagine how rude that would seem. similarly if someone says they can think of things that are true but that cannot be said its only polite to take them at their word even if you cant think of any yourself.

ne advantage of being old is that you can see change happen in your lifetime. a lot of the change ive seen is fragmentation. us politics is much more polarized than it used to be. culturally we have ever less common ground. the creative class flocks to a handful of happy cities abandoning the rest. and increasing economic inequality means the spread between rich and poor is growing too. id like to propose a hypothesis that all these trends are instances of the same phenomenon. and moreover that the cause is not some force thats pulling us apart but rather the erosion of forces that had been pushing us together.worse still for those who worry about these trends the forces that were pushing us together were an anomaly a onetime combination of circumstances thats unlikely to be repeated  and indeed that we would not want to repeat.the two forces were war above all world war ii and the rise of large corporations.the effects of world war ii were both economic and social. economically it decreased variation in income. like all modern armed forces americas were socialist economically. from each according to his ability to each according to his need. more or less. higher ranking members of the military got more as higher ranking members of socialist societies always do but what they got was fixed according to their rank. and the flattening effect wasnt limited to those under arms because the us economy was conscripted too. between 1942 and 1945 all wages were set by the national war labor board. like the military they defaulted to flatness. and this national standardization of wages was so pervasive that its effects could still be seen years after the war ended. 1business owners werent supposed to be making money either. fdr said not a single war millionaire would be permitted. to ensure that any increase in a companys profits over prewar levels was taxed at 85. and when what was left after corporate taxes reached individuals it was taxed again at a marginal rate of 93. 2socially too the war tended to decrease variation. over 16 million men and women from all sorts of different backgrounds were brought together in a way of life that was literally uniform. service rates for men born in the early 1920s approached 80. and working toward a common goal often under stress brought them still closer together.though strictly speaking world war ii lasted less than 4 years for the us its effects lasted longer. wars make central governments more powerful and world war ii was an extreme case of this. in the us as in all the other allied countries the federal government was slow to give up the new powers it had acquired. indeed in some respects the war didnt end in 1945 the enemy just switched to the soviet union. in tax rates federal power defense spending conscription and nationalism the decades after the war looked more like wartime than prewar peacetime. 3 and the social effects lasted too. the kid pulled into the army from behind a mule team in west virginia didnt simply go back to the farm afterward. something else was waiting for him something that looked a lot like the army.if total war was the big political story of the 20th century the big economic story was the rise of a new kind of company. and this too tended to produce both social and economic cohesion. 4the 20th century was the century of the big national corporation. general electric general foods general motors. developments in finance communications transportation and manufacturing enabled a new type of company whose goal was above all scale. version 1 of this world was lowres a duplo world of a few giant companies dominating each big market. 5the late 19th and early 20th centuries had been a time of consolidation led especially by j. p. morgan. thousands of companies run by their founders were merged into a couple hundred giant ones run by professional managers. economies of scale ruled the day. it seemed to people at the time that this was the final state of things. john d. rockefeller said in 1880the day of combination is here to stay. individualism has gone never to return.he turned out to be mistaken but he seemed right for the next hundred years.the consolidation that began in the late 19th century continued for most of the 20th. by the end of world war ii as michael lind writes the major sectors of the economy were either organized as governmentbacked cartels or dominated by a few oligopolistic corporations.for consumers this new world meant the same choices everywhere but only a few of them. when i grew up there were only 2 or 3 of most things and since they were all aiming at the middle of the market there wasnt much to differentiate them.one of the most important instances of this phenomenon was in tv. here there were 3 choices nbc cbs and abc. plus public tv for eggheads and communists. the programs that the 3 networks offered were indistinguishable. in fact here there was a triple pressure toward the center. if one show did try something daring local affiliates in conservative markets would make them stop. plus since tvs were expensive whole families watched the same shows together so they had to be suitable for everyone.and not only did everyone get the same thing they got it at the same time. its difficult to imagine now but every night tens of millions of families would sit down together in front of their tv set watching the same show at the same time as their next door neighbors. what happens now with the super bowl used to happen every night. we were literally in sync. 6in a way midcentury tv culture was good. the view it gave of the world was like youd find in a childrens book and it probably had something of the effect that parents hope childrens books have in making people behave better. but like childrens books tv was also misleading. dangerously misleading for adults. in his autobiography robert macneil talks of seeing gruesome images that had just come in from vietnam and thinking we cant show these to families while theyre having dinner.i know how pervasive the common culture was because i tried to opt out of it and it was practically impossible to find alternatives. when i was 13 i realized more from internal evidence than any outside source that the ideas we were being fed on tv were crap and i stopped watching it. 7 but it wasnt just tv. it seemed like everything around me was crap. the politicians all saying the same things the consumer brands making almost identical products with different labels stuck on to indicate how prestigious they were meant to be the balloonframe houses with fake colonial skins the cars with several feet of gratuitous metal on each end that started to fall apart after a couple years the red delicious apples that were red but only nominally apples. and in retrospect it was crap. 8but when i went looking for alternatives to fill this void i found practically nothing. there was no internet then. the only place to look was in the chain bookstore in our local shopping mall. 9 there i found a copy of the atlantic. i wish i could say it became a gateway into a wider world but in fact i found it boring and incomprehensible. like a kid tasting whisky for the first time and pretending to like it i preserved that magazine as carefully as if it had been a book. im sure i still have it somewhere. but though it was evidence that there was somewhere a world that wasnt red delicious i didnt find it till college.it wasnt just as consumers that the big companies made us similar. they did as employers too. within companies there were powerful forces pushing people toward a single model of how to look and act. ibm was particularly notorious for this but they were only a little more extreme than other big companies. and the models of how to look and act varied little between companies. meaning everyone within this world was expected to seem more or less the same. and not just those in the corporate world but also everyone who aspired to it  which in the middle of the 20th century meant most people who werent already in it. for most of the 20th century workingclass people tried hard to look middle class. you can see it in old photos. few adults aspired to look dangerous in 1950.but the rise of national corporations didnt just compress us culturally. it compressed us economically too and on both ends.along with giant national corporations we got giant national labor unions. and in the mid 20th century the corporations cut deals with the unions where they paid over market price for labor. partly because the unions were monopolies. 10 partly because as components of oligopolies themselves the corporations knew they could safely pass the cost on to their customers because their competitors would have to as well. and partly because in midcentury most of the giant companies were still focused on finding new ways to milk economies of scale. just as startups rightly pay aws a premium over the cost of running their own servers so they can focus on growth many of the big national corporations were willing to pay a premium for labor. 11as well as pushing incomes up from the bottom by overpaying unions the big companies of the 20th century also pushed incomes down at the top by underpaying their top management. economist j. k. galbraith wrote in 1967 that there are few corporations in which it would be suggested that executive salaries are at a maximum. 12to some extent this was an illusion. much of the de facto pay of executives never showed up on their income tax returns because it took the form of perks. the higher the rate of income tax the more pressure there was to pay employees upstream of it. in the uk where taxes were even higher than in the us companies would even pay their kids private school tuitions. one of the most valuable things the big companies of the mid 20th century gave their employees was job security and this too didnt show up in tax returns or income statistics. so the nature of employment in these organizations tended to yield falsely low numbers about economic inequality. but even accounting for that the big companies paid their best people less than market price. there was no market the expectation was that youd work for the same company for decades if not your whole career. 13your work was so illiquid there was little chance of getting market price. but that same illiquidity also encouraged you not to seek it. if the company promised to employ you till you retired and give you a pension afterward you didnt want to extract as much from it this year as you could. you needed to take care of the company so it could take care of you. especially when youd been working with the same group of people for decades. if you tried to squeeze the company for more money you were squeezing the organization that was going to take care of them. plus if you didnt put the company first you wouldnt be promoted and if you couldnt switch ladders promotion on this one was the only way up. 14to someone whod spent several formative years in the armed forces this situation didnt seem as strange as it does to us now. from their point of view as big company executives they were highranking officers. they got paid a lot more than privates. they got to have expense account lunches at the best restaurants and fly around on the companys gulfstreams. it probably didnt occur to most of them to ask if they were being paid market price.the ultimate way to get market price is to work for yourself by starting your own company. that seems obvious to any ambitious person now. but in the mid 20th century it was an alien concept. not because starting ones own company seemed too ambitious but because it didnt seem ambitious enough. even as late as the 1970s when i grew up the ambitious plan was to get lots of education at prestigious institutions and then join some other prestigious institution and work ones way up the hierarchy. your prestige was the prestige of the institution you belonged to. people did start their own businesses of course but educated people rarely did because in those days there was practically zero concept of starting what we now call a startup a business that starts small and grows big. that was much harder to do in the mid 20th century. starting ones own business meant starting a business that would start small and stay small. which in those days of big companies often meant scurrying around trying to avoid being trampled by elephants. it was more prestigious to be one of the executive class riding the elephant.by the 1970s no one stopped to wonder where the big prestigious companies had come from in the first place. it seemed like theyd always been there like the chemical elements. and indeed there was a double wall between ambitious kids in the 20th century and the origins of the big companies. many of the big companies were rollups that didnt have clear founders. and when they did the founders didnt seem like us. nearly all of them had been uneducated in the sense of not having been to college. they were what shakespeare called rude mechanicals. college trained one to be a member of the professional classes. its graduates didnt expect to do the sort of grubby menial work that andrew carnegie or henry ford started out doing. 15and in the 20th century there were more and more college graduates. they increased from about 2 of the population in 1900 to about 25 in 2000. in the middle of the century our two big forces intersect in the form of the gi bill which sent 2.2 million world war ii veterans to college. few thought of it in these terms but the result of making college the canonical path for the ambitious was a world in which it was socially acceptable to work for henry ford but not to be henry ford. 16i remember this world well. i came of age just as it was starting to break up. in my childhood it was still dominant. not quite so dominant as it had been. we could see from old tv shows and yearbooks and the way adults acted that people in the 1950s and 60s had been even more conformist than us. the midcentury model was already starting to get old. but that was not how we saw it at the time. we would at most have said that one could be a bit more daring in 1975 than 1965. and indeed things hadnt changed much yet.but change was coming soon. and when the duplo economy started to disintegrate it disintegrated in several different ways at once. vertically integrated companies literally disintegrated because it was more efficient to. incumbents faced new competitors as a markets went global and b technical innovation started to trump economies of scale turning size from an asset into a liability. smaller companies were increasingly able to survive as formerly narrow channels to consumers broadened. markets themselves started to change faster as whole new categories of products appeared. and last but not least the federal government which had previously smiled upon j. p. morgans world as the natural state of things began to realize it wasnt the last word after all.what j. p. morgan was to the horizontal axis henry ford was to the vertical. he wanted to do everything himself. the giant plant he built at river rouge between 1917 and 1928 literally took in iron ore at one end and sent cars out the other. 100000 people worked there. at the time it seemed the future. but that is not how car companies operate today. now much of the design and manufacturing happens in a long supply chain whose products the car companies ultimately assemble and sell. the reason car companies operate this way is that it works better. each company in the supply chain focuses on what they know best. and they each have to do it well or they can be swapped out for another supplier.why didnt henry ford realize that networks of cooperating companies work better than a single big company one reason is that supplier networks take a while to evolve. in 1917 doing everything himself seemed to ford the only way to get the scale he needed. and the second reason is that if you want to solve a problem using a network of cooperating companies you have to be able to coordinate their efforts and you can do that much better with computers. computers reduce the transaction costs that coase argued are the raison detre of corporations. that is a fundamental change.in the early 20th century big companies were synonymous with efficiency. in the late 20th century they were synonymous with inefficiency. to some extent this was because the companies themselves had become sclerotic. but it was also because our standards were higher.it wasnt just within existing industries that change occurred. the industries themselves changed. it became possible to make lots of new things and sometimes the existing companies werent the ones who did it best.microcomputers are a classic example. the market was pioneered by upstarts like apple. when it got big enough ibm decided it was worth paying attention to. at the time ibm completely dominated the computer industry. they assumed that all they had to do now that this market was ripe was to reach out and pick it. most people at the time would have agreed with them. but what happened next illustrated how much more complicated the world had become. ibm did launch a microcomputer. though quite successful it did not crush apple. but even more importantly ibm itself ended up being supplanted by a supplier coming in from the side  from software which didnt even seem to be the same business. ibms big mistake was to accept a nonexclusive license for dos. it must have seemed a safe move at the time. no other computer manufacturer had ever been able to outsell them. what difference did it make if other manufacturers could offer dos too the result of that miscalculation was an explosion of inexpensive pc clones. microsoft now owned the pc standard and the customer. and the microcomputer business ended up being apple vs microsoft.basically apple bumped ibm and then microsoft stole its wallet. that sort of thing did not happen to big companies in midcentury. but it was going to happen increasingly often in the future.change happened mostly by itself in the computer business. in other industries legal obstacles had to be removed first. many of the midcentury oligopolies had been anointed by the federal government with policies and in wartime large orders that kept out competitors. this didnt seem as dubious to government officials at the time as it sounds to us. they felt a twoparty system ensured sufficient competition in politics. it ought to work for business too.gradually the government realized that anticompetitive policies were doing more harm than good and during the carter administration it started to remove them. the word used for this process was misleadingly narrow deregulation. what was really happening was deoligopolization. it happened to one industry after another. two of the most visible to consumers were air travel and longdistance phone service which both became dramatically cheaper after deregulation.deregulation also contributed to the wave of hostile takeovers in the 1980s. in the old days the only limit on the inefficiency of companies short of actual bankruptcy was the inefficiency of their competitors. now companies had to face absolute rather than relative standards. any public company that didnt generate sufficient returns on its assets risked having its management replaced with one that would. often the new managers did this by breaking companies up into components that were more valuable separately. 17version 1 of the national economy consisted of a few big blocks whose relationships were negotiated in back rooms by a handful of executives politicians regulators and labor leaders. version 2 was higher resolution there were more companies of more different sizes making more different things and their relationships changed faster. in this world there were still plenty of back room negotiations but more was left to market forces. which further accelerated the fragmentation.its a little misleading to talk of versions when describing a gradual process but not as misleading as it might seem. there was a lot of change in a few decades and what we ended up with was qualitatively different. the companies in the sp 500 in 1958 had been there an average of 61 years. by 2012 that number was 18 years. 18the breakup of the duplo economy happened simultaneously with the spread of computing power. to what extent were computers a precondition it would take a book to answer that. obviously the spread of computing power was a precondition for the rise of startups. i suspect it was for most of what happened in finance too. but was it a precondition for globalization or the lbo wave i dont know but i wouldnt discount the possibility. it may be that the refragmentation was driven by computers in the way the industrial revolution was driven by steam engines. whether or not computers were a precondition they have certainly accelerated it.the new fluidity of companies changed peoples relationships with their employers. why climb a corporate ladder that might be yanked out from under you ambitious people started to think of a career less as climbing a single ladder than as a series of jobs that might be at different companies. more movement or even potential movement between companies introduced more competition in salaries. plus as companies became smaller it became easier to estimate how much an employee contributed to the companys revenue. both changes drove salaries toward market price. and since people vary dramatically in productivity paying market price meant salaries started to diverge.by no coincidence it was in the early 1980s that the term yuppie was coined. that word is not much used now because the phenomenon it describes is so taken for granted but at the time it was a label for something novel. yuppies were young professionals who made lots of money. to someone in their twenties today this wouldnt seem worth naming. why wouldnt young professionals make lots of money but until the 1980s being underpaid early in your career was part of what it meant to be a professional. young professionals were paying their dues working their way up the ladder. the rewards would come later. what was novel about yuppies was that they wanted market price for the work they were doing now.the first yuppies did not work for startups. that was still in the future. nor did they work for big companies. they were professionals working in fields like law finance and consulting. but their example rapidly inspired their peers. once they saw that new bmw 325i they wanted one too.underpaying people at the beginning of their career only works if everyone does it. once some employer breaks ranks everyone else has to or they cant get good people. and once started this process spreads through the whole economy because at the beginnings of peoples careers they can easily switch not merely employers but industries.but not all young professionals benefitted. you had to produce to get paid a lot. it was no coincidence that the first yuppies worked in fields where it was easy to measure that.more generally an idea was returning whose name sounds oldfashioned precisely because it was so rare for so long that you could make your fortune. as in the past there were multiple ways to do it. some made their fortunes by creating wealth and others by playing zerosum games. but once it became possible to make ones fortune the ambitious had to decide whether or not to. a physicist who chose physics over wall street in 1990 was making a sacrifice that a physicist in 1960 didnt have to think about.the idea even flowed back into big companies. ceos of big companies make more now than they used to and i think much of the reason is prestige. in 1960 corporate ceos had immense prestige. they were the winners of the only economic game in town. but if they made as little now as they did then in real dollar terms theyd seem like small fry compared to professional athletes and whiz kids making millions from startups and hedge funds. they dont like that idea so now they try to get as much as they can which is more than they had been getting. 19meanwhile a similar fragmentation was happening at the other end of the economic scale. as big companies oligopolies became less secure they were less able to pass costs on to customers and thus less willing to overpay for labor. and as the duplo world of a few big blocks fragmented into many companies of different sizes  some of them overseas  it became harder for unions to enforce their monopolies. as a result workers wages also tended toward market price. which inevitably if unions had been doing their job tended to be lower. perhaps dramatically so if automation had decreased the need for some kind of work.and just as the midcentury model induced social as well as economic cohesion its breakup brought social as well as economic fragmentation. people started to dress and act differently. those who would later be called the creative class became more mobile. people who didnt care much for religion felt less pressure to go to church for appearances sake while those who liked it a lot opted for increasingly colorful forms. some switched from meat loaf to tofu and others to hot pockets. some switched from driving ford sedans to driving small imported cars and others to driving suvs. kids who went to private schools or wished they did started to dress preppy and kids who wanted to seem rebellious made a conscious effort to look disreputable. in a hundred ways people spread apart. 20almost four decades later fragmentation is still increasing. has it been net good or bad i dont know the question may be unanswerable. not entirely bad though. we take for granted the forms of fragmentation we like and worry only about the ones we dont. but as someone who caught the tail end of midcentury conformism i can tell you it was no utopia. 21my goal here is not to say whether fragmentation has been good or bad just to explain why its happening. with the centripetal forces of total war and 20th century oligopoly mostly gone what will happen next and more specifically is it possible to reverse some of the fragmentation weve seenif it is it will have to happen piecemeal. you cant reproduce midcentury cohesion the way it was originally produced. it would be insane to go to war just to induce more national unity. and once you understand the degree to which the economic history of the 20th century was a lowres version 1 its clear you cant reproduce that either.20th century cohesion was something that happened at least in a sense naturally. the war was due mostly to external forces and the duplo economy was an evolutionary phase. if you want cohesion now youd have to induce it deliberately. and its not obvious how. i suspect the best well be able to do is address the symptoms of fragmentation. but that may be enough.the form of fragmentation people worry most about lately is economic inequality and if you want to eliminate that youre up against a truly formidable headwind that has been in operation since the stone age. technology.technology is a lever. it magnifies work. and the lever not only grows increasingly long but the rate at which it grows is itself increasing.which in turn means the variation in the amount of wealth people can create has not only been increasing but accelerating. the unusual conditions that prevailed in the mid 20th century masked this underlying trend. the ambitious had little choice but to join large organizations that made them march in step with lots of other people  literally in the case of the armed forces figuratively in the case of big corporations. even if the big corporations had wanted to pay people proportionate to their value they couldnt have figured out how. but that constraint has gone now. ever since it started to erode in the 1970s weve seen the underlying forces at work again. 22not everyone who gets rich now does it by creating wealth certainly. but a significant number do and the baumol effect means all their peers get dragged along too. 23 and as long as its possible to get rich by creating wealth the default tendency will be for economic inequality to increase. even if you eliminate all the other ways to get rich. you can mitigate this with subsidies at the bottom and taxes at the top but unless taxes are high enough to discourage people from creating wealth youre always going to be fighting a losing battle against increasing variation in productivity. 24that form of fragmentation like the others is here to stay. or rather back to stay. nothing is forever but the tendency toward fragmentation should be more forever than most things precisely because its not due to any particular cause. its simply a reversion to the mean. when rockefeller said individualism was gone he was right for a hundred years. its back now and thats likely to be true for longer.i worry that if we dont acknowledge this were headed for trouble. if we think 20th century cohesion disappeared because of few policy tweaks well be deluded into thinking we can get it back minus the bad parts somehow with a few countertweaks. and then well waste our time trying to eliminate fragmentation when wed be better off thinking about how to mitigate its consequences.notes1 lester thurow writing in 1975 said the wage differentials prevailing at the end of world war ii had become so embedded that they were regarded as just even after the egalitarian pressures of world war ii had disappeared. basically the same differentials exist to this day thirty years later. but goldin and margo think market forces in the postwar period also helped preserve the wartime compression of wages  specifically increased demand for unskilled workers and oversupply of educated ones.oddly enough the american custom of having employers pay for health insurance derives from efforts by businesses to circumvent nwlb wage controls in order to attract workers.2 as always tax rates dont tell the whole story. there were lots of exemptions especially for individuals. and in world war ii the tax codes were so new that the government had little acquired immunity to tax avoidance. if the rich paid high taxes during the war it was more because they wanted to than because they had to.after the war federal tax receipts as a percentage of gdp were about the same as they are now. in fact for the entire period since the war tax receipts have stayed close to 18 of gdp despite dramatic changes in tax rates. the lowest point occurred when marginal income tax rates were highest 14.1 in 1950. looking at the data its hard to avoid the conclusion that tax rates have had little effect on what people actually paid.3 though in fact the decade preceding the war had been a time of unprecedented federal power in response to the depression. which is not entirely a coincidence because the depression was one of the causes of the war. in many ways the new deal was a sort of dress rehearsal for the measures the federal government took during wartime. the wartime versions were much more drastic and more pervasive though. as anthony badger wrote for many americans the decisive change in their experiences came not with the new deal but with world war ii.4 i dont know enough about the origins of the world wars to say but its not inconceivable they were connected to the rise of big corporations. if that were the case 20th century cohesion would have a single cause.5 more precisely there was a bimodal economy consisting in galbraiths words of the world of the technically dynamic massively capitalized and highly organized corporations on the one hand and the hundreds of thousands of small and traditional proprietors on the other. money prestige and power were concentrated in the former and there was near zero crossover.6 i wonder how much of the decline in families eating together was due to the decline in families watching tv together afterward.7 i know when this happened because it was the season dallas premiered. everyone else was talking about what was happening on dallas and i had no idea what they meant.8 i didnt realize it till i started doing research for this essay but the meretriciousness of the products i grew up with is a wellknown byproduct of oligopoly. when companies cant compete on price they compete on tailfins.9 monroeville mall was at the time of its completion in 1969 the largest in the country. in the late 1970s the movie dawn of the dead was shot there. apparently the mall was not just the location of the movie but its inspiration the crowds of shoppers drifting through this huge mall reminded george romero of zombies. my first job was scooping ice cream in the baskinrobbins.10 labor unions were exempted from antitrust laws by the clayton antitrust act in 1914 on the grounds that a persons work is not a commodity or article of commerce. i wonder if that means service companies are also exempt.11 the relationships between unions and unionized companies can even be symbiotic because unions will exert political pressure to protect their hosts. according to michael lind when politicians tried to attack the ap supermarket chain because it was putting local grocery stores out of business ap successfully defended itself by allowing the unionization of its workforce in 1938 thereby gaining organized labor as a constituency. ive seen this phenomenon myself hotel unions are responsible for more of the political pressure against airbnb than hotel companies.12 galbraith was clearly puzzled that corporate executives would work so hard to make money for other people the shareholders instead of themselves. he devoted much of the new industrial state to trying to figure this out.his theory was that professionalism had replaced money as a motive and that modern corporate executives were like good scientists motivated less by financial rewards than by the desire to do good work and thereby earn the respect of their peers. there is something in this though i think lack of movement between companies combined with selfinterest explains much of observed behavior.13 galbraith p. 94 says a 1952 study of the 800 highest paid executives at 300 big corporations found that three quarters of them had been with their company for more than 20 years.14 it seems likely that in the first third of the 20th century executive salaries were low partly because companies then were more dependent on banks who would have disapproved if executives got too much. this was certainly true in the beginning. the first big company ceos were j. p. morgans hired hands.companies didnt start to finance themselves with retained earnings till the 1920s. till then they had to pay out their earnings in dividends and so depended on banks for capital for expansion. bankers continued to sit on corporate boards till the glasssteagall act in 1933.by midcentury big companies funded 34 of their growth from earnings. but the early years of bank dependence reinforced by the financial controls of world war ii must have had a big effect on social conventions about executive salaries. so it may be that the lack of movement between companies was as much the effect of low salaries as the cause.incidentally the switch in the 1920s to financing growth with retained earnings was one cause of the 1929 crash. the banks now had to find someone else to lend to so they made more margin loans.15 even now its hard to get them to. one of the things i find hardest to get into the heads of wouldbe startup founders is how important it is to do certain kinds of menial work early in the life of a company. doing things that dont scale is to how henry ford got started as a highfiber diet is to the traditional peasants diet they had no choice but to do the right thing while we have to make a conscious effort.16 founders werent celebrated in the press when i was a kid. our founder meant a photograph of a severelooking man with a walrus mustache and a wing collar who had died decades ago. the thing to be when i was a kid was an executive. if you werent around then its hard to grasp the cachet that term had. the fancy version of everything was called the executive model.17 the wave of hostile takeovers in the 1980s was enabled by a combination of circumstances court decisions striking down state antitakeover laws starting with the supreme courts 1982 decision in edgar v. mite corp. the reagan administrations comparatively sympathetic attitude toward takeovers the depository institutions act of 1982 which allowed banks and savings and loans to buy corporate bonds a new sec rule issued in 1982 rule 415 that made it possible to bring corporate bonds to market faster the creation of the junk bond business by michael milken a vogue for conglomerates in the preceding period that caused many companies to be combined that never should have been a decade of inflation that left many public companies trading below the value of their assets and not least the increasing complacency of managements.18 foster richard. creative destruction whips through corporate america. innosight february 2012.19 ceos of big companies may be overpaid. i dont know enough about big companies to say. but it is certainly not impossible for a ceo to make 200x as much difference to a companys revenues as the average employee. look at what steve jobs did for apple when he came back as ceo. it would have been a good deal for the board to give him 95 of the company. apples market cap the day steve came back in july 1997 was 1.73 billion. 5 of apple now january 2016 would be worth about 30 billion. and it would not be if steve hadnt come back apple probably wouldnt even exist anymore.merely including steve in the sample might be enough to answer the question of whether public company ceos in the aggregate are overpaid. and that is not as facile a trick as it might seem because the broader your holdings the more the aggregate is what you care about.20 the late 1960s were famous for social upheaval. but that was more rebellion which can happen in any era if people are provoked sufficiently than fragmentation. youre not seeing fragmentation unless you see people breaking off to both left and right.21 globally the trend has been in the other direction. while the us is becoming more fragmented the world as a whole is becoming less fragmented and mostly in good ways.22 there were a handful of ways to make a fortune in the mid 20th century. the main one was drilling for oil which was open to newcomers because it was not something big companies could dominate through economies of scale. how did individuals accumulate large fortunes in an era of such high taxes giant tax loopholes defended by two of the most powerful men in congress sam rayburn and lyndon johnson.but becoming a texas oilman was not in 1950 something one could aspire to the way starting a startup or going to work on wall street were in 2000 because a there was a strong local component and b success depended so much on luck.23 the baumol effect induced by startups is very visible in silicon valley. google will pay people millions of dollars a year to keep them from leaving to start or join startups.24 im not claiming variation in productivity is the only cause of economic inequality in the us. but its a significant cause and it will become as big a cause as it needs to in the sense that if you ban other ways to get rich people who want to get rich will use this route instead.

when intellectuals talk about the death penalty they talk about things like whether its permissible for the state to take someones life whether the death penalty acts as a deterrent and whether more death sentences are given to some groups than others. but in practice the debate about the death penalty is not about whether its ok to kill murderers. its about whether its ok to kill innocent people because at least 4 of people on death row are innocent.when i was a kid i imagined that it was unusual for people to be convicted of crimes they hadnt committed and that in murder cases especially this must be very rare. far from it. now thanks to organizations like the innocence project we see a constant stream of stories about murder convictions being overturned after new evidence emerges. sometimes the police and prosecutors were just very sloppy. sometimes they were crooked and knew full well they were convicting an innocent person.kenneth adams and three other men spent 18 years in prison on a murder conviction. they were exonerated after dna testing implicated three different men two of whom later confessed. the police had been told about the other men early in the investigation but never followed up the lead.keith harward spent 33 years in prison on a murder conviction. he was convicted because experts said his teeth matched photos of bite marks on one victim. he was exonerated after dna testing showed the murder had been committed by another man jerry crotty.ricky jackson and two other men spent 39 years in prison after being convicted of murder on the testimony of a 12 year old boy who later recanted and said hed been coerced by police. multiple people have confirmed the boy was elsewhere at the time. the three men were exonerated after the county prosecutor dropped the charges saying the state is conceding the obvious.alfred brown spent 12 years in prison on a murder conviction including 10 years on death row. he was exonerated after it was discovered that the assistant district attorney had concealed phone records proving he could not have committed the crimes.glenn ford spent 29 years on death row after having been convicted of murder. he was exonerated after new evidence proved he was not even at the scene when the murder occurred. the attorneys assigned to represent him had never tried a jury case before.cameron willingham was actually executed in 2004 by lethal injection. the expert who testified that he deliberately set fire to his house has since been discredited. a reexamination of the case ordered by the state of texas in 2009 concluded that a finding of arson could not be sustained.rich glossip has spent 20 years on death row after being convicted of murder on the testimony of the actual killer who escaped with a life sentence in return for implicating him. in 2015 he came within minutes of execution before it emerged that oklahoma had been planning to kill him with an illegal combination of drugs. they still plan to go ahead with the execution perhaps as soon as this summer despite new evidence exonerating him.i could go on. there are hundreds of similar cases. in florida alone 29 death row prisoners have been exonerated so far.far from being rare wrongful murder convictions are very common. police are under pressure to solve a crime that has gotten a lot of attention. when they find a suspect they want to believe hes guilty and ignore or even destroy evidence suggesting otherwise. district attorneys want to be seen as effective and tough on crime and in order to win convictions are willing to manipulate witnesses and withhold evidence. courtappointed defense attorneys are overworked and often incompetent. theres a ready supply of criminals willing to give false testimony in return for a lighter sentence suggestible witnesses who can be made to say whatever police want and bogus experts eager to claim that science proves the defendant is guilty. and juries want to believe them since otherwise some terrible crime remains unsolved.this circus of incompetence and dishonesty is the real issue with the death penalty. we dont even reach the point where theoretical questions about the moral justification or effectiveness of capital punishment start to matter because so many of the people sentenced to death are actually innocent. whatever it means in theory in practice capital punishment means killing innocent people.

every year since 1982 forbes magazine has published a list of the richest americans. if we compare the 100 richest people in 1982 to the 100 richest in 2020 we notice some big differences.in 1982 the most common source of wealth was inheritance. of the 100 richest people 60 inherited from an ancestor. there were 10 du pont heirs alone. by 2020 the number of heirs had been cut in half accounting for only 27 of the biggest 100 fortunes.why would the percentage of heirs decrease not because inheritance taxes increased. in fact they decreased significantly during this period. the reason the percentage of heirs has decreased is not that fewer people are inheriting great fortunes but that more people are making them.how are people making these new fortunes roughly 34 by starting companies and 14 by investing. of the 73 new fortunes in 2020 56 derive from founders or early employees equity 52 founders 2 early employees and 2 wives of founders and 17 from managing investment funds.there were no fund managers among the 100 richest americans in 1982. hedge funds and private equity firms existed in 1982 but none of their founders were rich enough yet to make it into the top 100. two things changed fund managers discovered new ways to generate high returns and more investors were willing to trust them with their money. 1but the main source of new fortunes now is starting companies and when you look at the data you see big changes there too. people get richer from starting companies now than they did in 1982 because the companies do different things.in 1982 there were two dominant sources of new wealth oil and real estate. of the 40 new fortunes in 1982 at least 24 were due primarily to oil or real estate. now only a small number are of the 73 new fortunes in 2020 4 were due to real estate and only 2 to oil.by 2020 the biggest source of new wealth was what are sometimes called tech companies. of the 73 new fortunes about 30 derive from such companies. these are particularly common among the richest of the rich 8 of the top 10 fortunes in 2020 were new fortunes of this type.arguably its slightly misleading to treat tech as a category. isnt amazon really a retailer and tesla a car maker yes and no. maybe in 50 years when what we call tech is taken for granted it wont seem right to put these two businesses in the same category. but at the moment at least there is definitely something they share in common that distinguishes them. what retailer starts aws what car maker is run by someone who also has a rocket companythe tech companies behind the top 100 fortunes also form a welldifferentiated group in the sense that theyre all companies that venture capitalists would readily invest in and the others mostly not. and theres a reason why these are mostly companies that win by having better technology rather than just a ceo whos really driven and good at making deals.to that extent the rise of the tech companies represents a qualitative change. the oil and real estate magnates of the 1982 forbes 400 didnt win by making better technology. they won by being really driven and good at making deals. 2 and indeed that way of getting rich is so old that it predates the industrial revolution. the courtiers who got rich in the nominal service of european royal houses in the 16th and 17th centuries were also as a rule really driven and good at making deals.people who dont look any deeper than the gini coefficient look back on the world of 1982 as the good old days because those who got rich then didnt get as rich. but if you dig into how they got rich the old days dont look so good. in 1982 84 of the richest 100 people got rich by inheritance extracting natural resources or doing real estate deals. is that really better than a world in which the richest people get rich by starting tech companieswhy are people starting so many more new companies than they used to and why are they getting so rich from it the answer to the first question curiously enough is that its misphrased. we shouldnt be asking why people are starting companies but why theyre starting companies again. 3in 1892 the new york herald tribune compiled a list of all the millionaires in america. they found 4047 of them. how many had inherited their wealth then only about 20 which is less than the proportion of heirs today. and when you investigate the sources of the new fortunes 1892 looks even more like today. hugh rockoff found that many of the richest ... gained their initial edge from the new technology of mass production. 4so its not 2020 thats the anomaly here but 1982. the real question is why so few people had gotten rich from starting companies in 1982. and the answer is that even as the herald tribunes list was being compiled a wave of consolidation was sweeping through the american economy. in the late 19th and early 20th centuries financiers like j. p. morgan combined thousands of smaller companies into a few hundred giant ones with commanding economies of scale. by the end of world war ii as michael lind writes the major sectors of the economy were either organized as governmentbacked cartels or dominated by a few oligopolistic corporations. 5in 1960 most of the people who start startups today would have gone to work for one of them. you could get rich from starting your own company in 1890 and in 2020 but in 1960 it was not really a viable option. you couldnt break through the oligopolies to get at the markets. so the prestigious route in 1960 was not to start your own company but to work your way up the corporate ladder at an existing one. 6making everyone a corporate employee decreased economic inequality and every other kind of variation but if your model of normal is the mid 20th century you have a very misleading model in that respect. j. p. morgans economy turned out to be just a phase and starting in the 1970s it began to break up.why did it break up partly senescence. the big companies that seemed models of scale and efficiency in 1930 had by 1970 become slack and bloated. by 1970 the rigid structure of the economy was full of cosy nests that various groups had built to insulate themselves from market forces. during the carter administration the federal government realized something was amiss and began in a process they called deregulation to roll back the policies that propped up the oligopolies.but it wasnt just decay from within that broke up j. p. morgans economy. there was also pressure from without in the form of new technology and particularly microelectronics. the best way to envision what happened is to imagine a pond with a crust of ice on top. initially the only way from the bottom to the surface is around the edges. but as the ice crust weakens you start to be able to punch right through the middle.the edges of the pond were pure tech companies that actually described themselves as being in the electronics or software business. when you used the word startup in 1990 that was what you meant. but now startups are punching right through the middle of the ice crust and displacing incumbents like retailers and tv networks and car companies. 7but though the breakup of j. p. morgans economy created a new world in the technological sense it was a reversion to the norm in the social sense. if you only look back as far as the mid 20th century it seems like people getting rich by starting their own companies is a recent phenomenon. but if you look back further you realize its actually the default. so what we should expect in the future is more of the same. indeed we should expect both the number and wealth of founders to grow because every decade it gets easier to start a startup.part of the reason its getting easier to start a startup is social. society is reassimilating the concept. if you start one now your parents wont freak out the way they would have a generation ago and knowledge about how to do it is much more widespread. but the main reason its easier to start a startup now is that its cheaper. technology has driven down the cost of both building products and acquiring customers.the decreasing cost of starting a startup has in turn changed the balance of power between founders and investors. back when starting a startup meant building a factory you needed investors permission to do it at all. but now investors need founders more than founders need investors and that combined with the increasing amount of venture capital available has driven up valuations. 8so the decreasing cost of starting a startup increases the number of rich people in two ways it means that more people start them and that those who do can raise money on better terms.but theres also a third factor at work the companies themselves are more valuable because newly founded companies grow faster than they used to. technology hasnt just made it cheaper to build and distribute things but faster too.this trend has been running for a long time. ibm founded in 1896 took 45 years to reach a billion 2020 dollars in revenue. hewlettpackard founded in 1939 took 25 years. microsoft founded in 1975 took 13 years. now the norm for fastgrowing companies is 7 or 8 years. 9fast growth has a double effect on the value of founders stock. the value of a company is a function of its revenue and its growth rate. so if a company grows faster you not only get to a billion dollars in revenue sooner but the company is more valuable when it reaches that point than it would be if it were growing slower.thats why founders sometimes get so rich so young now. the low initial cost of starting a startup means founders can start young and the fast growth of companies today means that if they succeed they could be surprisingly rich just a few years later.its easier now to start and grow a company than it has ever been. that means more people start them that those who do get better terms from investors and that the resulting companies become more valuable. once you understand how these mechanisms work and that startups were suppressed for most of the 20th century you dont have to resort to some vague right turn the country took under reagan to explain why americas gini coefficient is increasing. of course the gini coefficient is increasing. with more people starting more valuable companies how could it not benotes1 investment firms grew rapidly after a regulatory change by the labor department in 1978 allowed pension funds to invest in them but the effects of this growth were not yet visible in the top 100 fortunes in 1982.2 george mitchell deserves mention as an exception. though really driven and good at making deals he was also the first to figure out how to use fracking to get natural gas out of shale.3 when i say people are starting more companies i mean the type of company meant to grow very big. there has actually been a decrease in the last couple decades in the overall number of new companies. but the vast majority of companies are small retail and service businesses. so what the statistics about the decreasing number of new businesses mean is that people are starting fewer shoe stores and barber shops.people sometimes get confused when they see a graph labelled startups thats going down because there are two senses of the word startup 1 the founding of a company and 2 a particular type of company designed to grow big fast. the statistics mean startup in sense 1 not sense 2.4 rockoff hugh. great fortunes of the gilded age. nber working paper 14555 2008.5 lind michael. land of promise. harpercollins 2012.its also likely that the high tax rates in the mid 20th century deterred people from starting their own companies. starting ones own company is risky and when risk isnt rewarded people opt for safety instead.but it wasnt simply cause and effect. the oligopolies and high tax rates of the mid 20th century were all of a piece. lower taxes are not just a cause of entrepreneurship but an effect as well the people getting rich in the mid 20th century from real estate and oil exploration lobbied for and got huge tax loopholes that made their effective tax rate much lower and presumably if it had been more common to grow big companies by building new technology the people doing that would have lobbied for their own loopholes as well.6 thats why the people who did get rich in the mid 20th century so often got rich from oil exploration or real estate. those were the two big areas of the economy that werent susceptible to consolidation.7 the pure tech companies used to be called high technology startups. but now that startups can punch through the middle of the ice crust we dont need a separate name for the edges and the term hightech has a decidedly retro sound.8 higher valuations mean you either sell less stock to get a given amount of money or get more money for a given amount of stock. the typical startup does some of each. obviously you end up richer if you keep more stock but you should also end up richer if you raise more money because a it should make the company more successful and b you should be able to last longer before the next round or not even need one. notice all those shoulds though. in practice a lot of money slips through them.it might seem that the huge rounds raised by startups nowadays contradict the claim that it has become cheaper to start one. but theres no contradiction here the startups that raise the most are the ones doing it by choice in order to grow faster not the ones doing it because they need the money to survive. theres nothing like not needing money to make people offer it to you.you would think after having been on the side of labor in its fight with capital for almost two centuries that the far left would be happy that labor has finally prevailed. but none of them seem to be. you can almost hear them saying no no not that way.9 ibm was created in 1911 by merging three companies the most important of which was herman holleriths tabulating machine company founded in 1896. in 1941 its revenues were 60 million.hewlettpackards revenues in 1964 were 125 million.microsofts revenues in 1988 were 590 million.thanks to trevor blackwell jessica livingston bob lesko robert morris russ roberts and alex tabarrok for reading drafts of this and to jon erlichman for growth data.

one of the most important things i didnt understand about the world when i was a child is the degree to which the returns for performance are superlinear.teachers and coaches implicitly told us the returns were linear. you get out i heard a thousand times what you put in. they meant well but this is rarely true. if your product is only half as good as your competitors you dont get half as many customers. you get no customers and you go out of business.its obviously true that the returns for performance are superlinear in business. some think this is a flaw of capitalism and that if we changed the rules it would stop being true. but superlinear returns for performance are a feature of the world not an artifact of rules weve invented. we see the same pattern in fame power military victories knowledge and even benefit to humanity. in all of these the rich get richer. 1you cant understand the world without understanding the concept of superlinear returns. and if youre ambitious you definitely should because this will be the wave you surf on.it may seem as if there are a lot of different situations with superlinear returns but as far as i can tell they reduce to two fundamental causes exponential growth and thresholds.the most obvious case of superlinear returns is when youre working on something that grows exponentially. for example growing bacterial cultures. when they grow at all they grow exponentially. but theyre tricky to grow. which means the difference in outcome between someone whos adept at it and someone whos not is very great.startups can also grow exponentially and we see the same pattern there. some manage to achieve high growth rates. most dont. and as a result you get qualitatively different outcomes the companies with high growth rates tend to become immensely valuable while the ones with lower growth rates may not even survive.y combinator encourages founders to focus on growth rate rather than absolute numbers. it prevents them from being discouraged early on when the absolute numbers are still low. it also helps them decide what to focus on you can use growth rate as a compass to tell you how to evolve the company. but the main advantage is that by focusing on growth rate you tend to get something that grows exponentially.yc doesnt explicitly tell founders that with growth rate you get out what you put in but its not far from the truth. and if growth rate were proportional to performance then the reward for performance p over time t would be proportional to pt.even after decades of thinking about this i find that sentence startling.whenever how well you do depends on how well youve done youll get exponential growth. but neither our dna nor our customs prepare us for it. no one finds exponential growth natural every child is surprised the first time they hear it by the story of the man who asks the king for a single grain of rice the first day and double the amount each successive day.what we dont understand naturally we develop customs to deal with but we dont have many customs about exponential growth either because there have been so few instances of it in human history. in principle herding should have been one the more animals you had the more offspring theyd have. but in practice grazing land was the limiting factor and there was no plan for growing that exponentially.or more precisely no generally applicable plan. there was a way to grow ones territory exponentially by conquest. the more territory you control the more powerful your army becomes and the easier it is to conquer new territory. this is why history is full of empires. but so few people created or ran empires that their experiences didnt affect customs very much. the emperor was a remote and terrifying figure not a source of lessons one could use in ones own life.the most common case of exponential growth in preindustrial times was probably scholarship. the more you know the easier it is to learn new things. the result then as now was that some people were startlingly more knowledgeable than the rest about certain topics. but this didnt affect customs much either. although empires of ideas can overlap and there can thus be far more emperors in preindustrial times this type of empire had little practical effect. 2that has changed in the last few centuries. now the emperors of ideas can design bombs that defeat the emperors of territory. but this phenomenon is still so new that we havent fully assimilated it. few even of the participants realize theyre benefitting from exponential growth or ask what they can learn from other instances of it.the other source of superlinear returns is embodied in the expression winner take all. in a sports match the relationship between performance and return is a step function the winning team gets one win whether they do much better or just slightly better. 3the source of the step function is not competition per se however. its that there are thresholds in the outcome. you dont need competition to get those. there can be thresholds in situations where youre the only participant like proving a theorem or hitting a target.its remarkable how often a situation with one source of superlinear returns also has the other. crossing thresholds leads to exponential growth the winning side in a battle usually suffers less damage which makes them more likely to win in the future. and exponential growth helps you cross thresholds in a market with network effects a company that grows fast enough can shut out potential competitors.fame is an interesting example of a phenomenon that combines both sources of superlinear returns. fame grows exponentially because existing fans bring you new ones. but the fundamental reason its so concentrated is thresholds theres only so much room on the alist in the average persons head.the most important case combining both sources of superlinear returns may be learning. knowledge grows exponentially but there are also thresholds in it. learning to ride a bicycle for example. some of these thresholds are akin to machine tools once you learn to read youre able to learn anything else much faster. but the most important thresholds of all are those representing new discoveries. knowledge seems to be fractal in the sense that if you push hard at the boundary of one area of knowledge you sometimes discover a whole new field. and if you do you get first crack at all the new discoveries to be made in it. newton did this and so did durer and darwin.are there general rules for finding situations with superlinear returns the most obvious one is to seek work that compounds.there are two ways work can compound. it can compound directly in the sense that doing well in one cycle causes you to do better in the next. that happens for example when youre building infrastructure or growing an audience or brand. or work can compound by teaching you since learning compounds. this second case is an interesting one because you may feel youre doing badly as its happening. you may be failing to achieve your immediate goal. but if youre learning a lot then youre getting exponential growth nonetheless.this is one reason silicon valley is so tolerant of failure. people in silicon valley arent blindly tolerant of failure. theyll only continue to bet on you if youre learning from your failures. but if you are you are in fact a good bet maybe your company didnt grow the way you wanted but you yourself have and that should yield results eventually.indeed the forms of exponential growth that dont consist of learning are so often intermixed with it that we should probably treat this as the rule rather than the exception. which yields another heuristic always be learning. if youre not learning youre probably not on a path that leads to superlinear returns.but dont overoptimize what youre learning. dont limit yourself to learning things that are already known to be valuable. youre learning you dont know for sure yet whats going to be valuable and if youre too strict youll lop off the outliers.what about step functions are there also useful heuristics of the form seek thresholds or seek competition here the situation is trickier. the existence of a threshold doesnt guarantee the game will be worth playing. if you play a round of russian roulette youll be in a situation with a threshold certainly but in the best case youre no better off. seek competition is similarly useless what if the prize isnt worth competing for sufficiently fast exponential growth guarantees both the shape and magnitude of the return curve  because something that grows fast enough will grow big even if its trivially small at first  but thresholds only guarantee the shape. 4a principle for taking advantage of thresholds has to include a test to ensure the game is worth playing. heres one that does if you come across something thats mediocre yet still popular it could be a good idea to replace it. for example if a company makes a product that people dislike yet still buy then presumably theyd buy a better alternative if you made one. 5it would be great if there were a way to find promising intellectual thresholds. is there a way to tell which questions have whole new fields beyond them i doubt we could ever predict this with certainty but the prize is so valuable that it would be useful to have predictors that were even a little better than random and theres hope of finding those. we can to some degree predict when a research problem isnt likely to lead to new discoveries when it seems legit but boring. whereas the kind that do lead to new discoveries tend to seem very mystifying but perhaps unimportant. if they were mystifying and obviously important theyd be famous open questions with lots of people already working on them. so one heuristic here is to be driven by curiosity rather than careerism  to give free rein to your curiosity instead of working on what youre supposed to.the prospect of superlinear returns for performance is an exciting one for the ambitious. and theres good news in this department this territory is expanding in both directions. there are more types of work in which you can get superlinear returns and the returns themselves are growing.there are two reasons for this though theyre so closely intertwined that theyre more like one and a half progress in technology and the decreasing importance of organizations.fifty years ago it used to be much more necessary to be part of an organization to work on ambitious projects. it was the only way to get the resources you needed the only way to have colleagues and the only way to get distribution. so in 1970 your prestige was in most cases the prestige of the organization you belonged to. and prestige was an accurate predictor because if you werent part of an organization you werent likely to achieve much. there were a handful of exceptions most notably artists and writers who worked alone using inexpensive tools and had their own brands. but even they were at the mercy of organizations for reaching audiences. 6a world dominated by organizations damped variation in the returns for performance. but this world has eroded significantly just in my lifetime. now a lot more people can have the freedom that artists and writers had in the 20th century. there are lots of ambitious projects that dont require much initial funding and lots of new ways to learn make money find colleagues and reach audiences.theres still plenty of the old world left but the rate of change has been dramatic by historical standards. especially considering whats at stake. its hard to imagine a more fundamental change than one in the returns for performance.without the damping effect of institutions there will be more variation in outcomes. which doesnt imply everyone will be better off people who do well will do even better but those who do badly will do worse. thats an important point to bear in mind. exposing oneself to superlinear returns is not for everyone. most people will be better off as part of the pool. so who should shoot for superlinear returns ambitious people of two types those who know theyre so good that theyll be net ahead in a world with higher variation and those particularly the young who can afford to risk trying it to find out. 7the switch away from institutions wont simply be an exodus of their current inhabitants. many of the new winners will be people theyd never have let in. so the resulting democratization of opportunity will be both greater and more authentic than any tame intramural version the institutions themselves might have cooked up.not everyone is happy about this great unlocking of ambition. it threatens some vested interests and contradicts some ideologies. 8 but if youre an ambitious individual its good news for you. how should you take advantage of itthe most obvious way to take advantage of superlinear returns for performance is by doing exceptionally good work. at the far end of the curve incremental effort is a bargain. all the more so because theres less competition at the far end  and not just for the obvious reason that its hard to do something exceptionally well but also because people find the prospect so intimidating that few even try. which means its not just a bargain to do exceptional work but a bargain even to try to.there are many variables that affect how good your work is and if you want to be an outlier you need to get nearly all of them right. for example to do something exceptionally well you have to be interested in it. mere diligence is not enough. so in a world with superlinear returns its even more valuable to know what youre interested in and to find ways to work on it. 9 it will also be important to choose work that suits your circumstances. for example if theres a kind of work that inherently requires a huge expenditure of time and energy it will be increasingly valuable to do it when youre young and dont yet have children.theres a surprising amount of technique to doing great work. its not just a matter of trying hard. im going to take a shot giving a recipe in one paragraph.choose work you have a natural aptitude for and a deep interest in. develop a habit of working on your own projects it doesnt matter what they are so long as you find them excitingly ambitious. work as hard as you can without burning out and this will eventually bring you to one of the frontiers of knowledge. these look smooth from a distance but up close theyre full of gaps. notice and explore such gaps and if youre lucky one will expand into a whole new field. take as much risk as you can afford if youre not failing occasionally youre probably being too conservative. seek out the best colleagues. develop good taste and learn from the best examples. be honest especially with yourself. exercise and eat and sleep well and avoid the more dangerous drugs. when in doubt follow your curiosity. it never lies and it knows more than you do about whats worth paying attention to. 10and there is of course one other thing you need to be lucky. luck is always a factor but its even more of a factor when youre working on your own rather than as part of an organization. and though there are some valid aphorisms about luck being where preparedness meets opportunity and so on theres also a component of true chance that you cant do anything about. the solution is to take multiple shots. which is another reason to start taking risks early.the best example of a field with superlinear returns is probably science. it has exponential growth in the form of learning combined with thresholds at the extreme edge of performance  literally at the limits of knowledge.the result has been a level of inequality in scientific discovery that makes the wealth inequality of even the most stratified societies seem mild by comparison. newtons discoveries were arguably greater than all his contemporaries combined. 11this point may seem obvious but it might be just as well to spell it out. superlinear returns imply inequality. the steeper the return curve the greater the variation in outcomes.in fact the correlation between superlinear returns and inequality is so strong that it yields another heuristic for finding work of this type look for fields where a few big winners outperform everyone else. a kind of work where everyone does about the same is unlikely to be one with superlinear returns.what are fields where a few big winners outperform everyone else here are some obvious ones sports politics art music acting directing writing math science starting companies and investing. in sports the phenomenon is due to externally imposed thresholds you only need to be a few percent faster to win every race. in politics power grows much as it did in the days of emperors. and in some of the other fields including politics success is driven largely by fame which has its own source of superlinear growth. but when we exclude sports and politics and the effects of fame a remarkable pattern emerges the remaining list is exactly the same as the list of fields where you have to be independentminded to succeed  where your ideas have to be not just correct but novel as well. 12this is obviously the case in science. you cant publish papers saying things that other people have already said. but its just as true in investing for example. its only useful to believe that a company will do well if most other investors dont if everyone else thinks the company will do well then its stock price will already reflect that and theres no room to make money.what else can we learn from these fields in all of them you have to put in the initial effort. superlinear returns seem small at first. at this rate you find yourself thinking ill never get anywhere. but because the reward curve rises so steeply at the far end its worth taking extraordinary measures to get there.in the startup world the name for this principle is do things that dont scale. if you pay a ridiculous amount of attention to your tiny initial set of customers ideally youll kick off exponential growth by word of mouth. but this same principle applies to anything that grows exponentially. learning for example. when you first start learning something you feel lost. but its worth making the initial effort to get a toehold because the more you learn the easier it will get.theres another more subtle lesson in the list of fields with superlinear returns not to equate work with a job. for most of the 20th century the two were identical for nearly everyone and as a result weve inherited a custom that equates productivity with having a job. even now to most people the phrase your work means their job. but to a writer or artist or scientist it means whatever theyre currently studying or creating. for someone like that their work is something they carry with them from job to job if they have jobs at all. it may be done for an employer but its part of their portfolio.its an intimidating prospect to enter a field where a few big winners outperform everyone else. some people do this deliberately but you dont need to. if you have sufficient natural ability and you follow your curiosity sufficiently far youll end up in one. your curiosity wont let you be interested in boring questions and interesting questions tend to create fields with superlinear returns if theyre not already part of one.the territory of superlinear returns is by no means static. indeed the most extreme returns come from expanding it. so while both ambition and curiosity can get you into this territory curiosity may be the more powerful of the two. ambition tends to make you climb existing peaks but if you stick close enough to an interesting enough question it may grow into a mountain beneath you.notestheres a limit to how sharply you can distinguish between effort performance and return because theyre not sharply distinguished in fact. what counts as return to one person might be performance to another. but though the borders of these concepts are blurry theyre not meaningless. ive tried to write about them as precisely as i could without crossing into error.1 evolution itself is probably the most pervasive example of superlinear returns for performance. but this is hard for us to empathize with because were not the recipients were the returns.2 knowledge did of course have a practical effect before the industrial revolution. the development of agriculture changed human life completely. but this kind of change was the result of broad gradual improvements in technique not the discoveries of a few exceptionally learned people.3 its not mathematically correct to describe a step function as superlinear but a step function starting from zero works like a superlinear function when it describes the reward curve for effort by a rational actor. if it starts at zero then the part before the step is below any linearly increasing return and the part after the step must be above the necessary return at that point or no one would bother.4 seeking competition could be a good heuristic in the sense that some people find it motivating. its also somewhat of a guide to promising problems because its a sign that other people find them promising. but its a very imperfect sign often theres a clamoring crowd chasing some problem and they all end up being trumped by someone quietly working on another one.5 not always though. you have to be careful with this rule. when something is popular despite being mediocre theres often a hidden reason why. perhaps monopoly or regulation make it hard to compete. perhaps customers have bad taste or have broken procedures for deciding what to buy. there are huge swathes of mediocre things that exist for such reasons.6 in my twenties i wanted to be an artist and even went to art school to study painting. mostly because i liked art but a nontrivial part of my motivation came from the fact that artists seemed least at the mercy of organizations.7 in principle everyone is getting superlinear returns. learning compounds and everyone learns in the course of their life. but in practice few push this kind of everyday learning to the point where the return curve gets really steep.8 its unclear exactly what advocates of equity mean by it. they seem to disagree among themselves. but whatever they mean is probably at odds with a world in which institutions have less power to control outcomes and a handful of outliers do much better than everyone else.it may seem like bad luck for this concept that it arose at just the moment when the world was shifting in the opposite direction but i dont think this was a coincidence. i think one reason it arose now is because its adherents feel threatened by rapidly increasing variation in performance.9 corollary parents who pressure their kids to work on something prestigious like medicine even though they have no interest in it will be hosing them even more than they have in the past.10 the original version of this paragraph was the first draft of how to do great work. as soon as i wrote it i realized it was a more important topic than superlinear returns so i paused the present essay to expand this paragraph into its own. practically nothing remains of the original version because after i finished how to do great work i rewrote it based on that.11 before the industrial revolution people who got rich usually did it like emperors capturing some resource made them more powerful and enabled them to capture more. now it can be done like a scientist by discovering or building something uniquely valuable. most people who get rich use a mix of the old and the new ways but in the most advanced economies the ratio has shifted dramatically toward discovery just in the last half century.12 its not surprising that conventionalminded people would dislike inequality if independentmindedness is one of the biggest drivers of it. but its not simply that they dont want anyone to have what they cant. the conventionalminded literally cant imagine what its like to have novel ideas. so the whole phenomenon of great variation in performance seems unnatural to them and when they encounter it they assume it must be due to cheating or to some malign external influence.

about twenty years ago people noticed computers and tv were on a collision course and started to speculate about what theyd produce when they converged. we now know the answer computers. its clear now that even by using the word convergence we were giving tv too much credit. this wont be convergence so much as replacement. people may still watch things they call tv shows but theyll watch them mostly on computers.what decided the contest for computers four forces three of which one could have predicted and one that would have been harder to.one predictable cause of victory is that the internet is an open platform. anyone can build whatever they want on it and the market picks the winners. so innovation happens at hacker speeds instead of big company speeds.the second is moores law which has worked its usual magic on internet bandwidth. 1the third reason computers won is piracy. users prefer it not just because its free but because its more convenient. bittorrent and youtube have already trained a new generation of viewers that the place to watch shows is on a computer screen. 2the somewhat more surprising force was one specific type of innovation social applications. the average teenage kid has a pretty much infinite capacity for talking to their friends. but they cant physically be with them all the time. when i was in high school the solution was the telephone. now its social networks multiplayer games and various messaging applications. the way you reach them all is through a computer. 3 which means every teenage kid a wants a computer with an internet connection b has an incentive to figure out how to use it and c spends countless hours in front of it.this was the most powerful force of all. this was what made everyone want computers. nerds got computers because they liked them. then gamers got them to play games on. but it was connecting to other people that got everyone else thats what made even grandmas and 14 year old girls want computers.after decades of running an iv drip right into their audience people in the entertainment business had understandably come to think of them as rather passive. they thought theyd be able to dictate the way shows reached audiences. but they underestimated the force of their desire to connect with one another.facebook killed tv. that is wildly oversimplified of course but probably as close to the truth as you can get in three words.the tv networks already seem grudgingly to see where things are going and have responded by putting their stuff grudgingly online. but theyre still dragging their heels. they still seem to wish people would watch shows on tv instead just as newspapers that put their stories online still seem to wish people would wait till the next morning and read them printed on paper. they should both just face the fact that the internet is the primary medium.theyd be in a better position if theyd done that earlier. when a new medium arises thats powerful enough to make incumbents nervous then its probably powerful enough to win and the best thing they can do is jump in immediately.whether they like it or not big changes are coming because the internet dissolves the two cornerstones of broadcast media synchronicity and locality. on the internet you dont have to send everyone the same signal and you dont have to send it to them from a local source. people will watch what they want when they want it and group themselves according to whatever shared interest they feel most strongly. maybe their strongest shared interest will be their physical location but im guessing not. which means local tv is probably dead. it was an artifact of limitations imposed by old technology. if someone were creating an internetbased tv company from scratch now they might have some plan for shows aimed at specific regions but it wouldnt be a top priority.synchronicity and locality are tied together. tv network affiliates care whats on at 10 because that delivers viewers for local news at 11. this connection adds more brittleness than strength however people dont watch whats on at 10 because they want to watch the news afterward.tv networks will fight these trends because they dont have sufficient flexibility to adapt to them. theyre hemmed in by local affiliates in much the same way car companies are hemmed in by dealers and unions. inevitably the people running the networks will take the easy route and try to keep the old model running for a couple more years just as the record labels have done.a recent article in the wall street journal described how tv networks were trying to add more live shows partly as a way to make viewers watch tv synchronously instead of watching recorded shows when it suited them. instead of delivering what viewers want theyre trying to force them to change their habits to suit the networks obsolete business model. that never works unless you have a monopoly or cartel to enforce it and even then it only works temporarily.the other reason networks like live shows is that theyre cheaper to produce. there they have the right idea but they havent followed it to its conclusion. live content can be way cheaper than networks realize and the way to take advantage of dramatic decreases in cost is to increase volume. the networks are prevented from seeing this whole line of reasoning because they still think of themselves as being in the broadcast businessas sending one signal to everyone. 4now would be a good time to start any company that competes with tv networks. thats what a lot of internet startups are though they may not have had this as an explicit goal. people only have so many leisure hours a day and tv is premised on such long sessions unlike google which prides itself on sending users on their way quickly that anything that takes up their time is competing with it. but in addition to such indirect competitors i think tv companies will increasingly face direct ones.even in cable tv the long tail was lopped off prematurely by the threshold you had to get over to start a new channel. it will be longer on the internet and there will be more mobility within it. in this new world the existing players will only have the advantages any big company has in its market.that will change the balance of power between the networks and the people who produce shows. the networks used to be gatekeepers. they distributed your work and sold advertising on it. now the people who produce a show can distribute it themselves. the main value networks supply now is ad sales. which will tend to put them in the position of service providers rather than publishers.shows will change even more. on the internet theres no reason to keep their current format or even the fact that they have a single format. indeed the more interesting sort of convergence thats coming is between shows and games. but on the question of what sort of entertainment gets distributed on the internet in 20 years i wouldnt dare to make any predictions except that things will change a lot. well get whatever the most imaginative people can cook up. thats why the internet won.

i recently told applicants to y combinator that the best advice i could give for getting in per word wasexplain what youve learned from users.that tests a lot of things whether youre paying attention to users how well you understand them and even how much they need what youre making.afterward i asked myself the same question. what have i learned from ycs users the startups weve fundedthe first thing that came to mind was that most startups have the same problems. no two have exactly the same problems but its surprising how much the problems remain the same regardless of what theyre making. once youve advised 100 startups all doing different things you rarely encounter problems you havent seen before.this fact is one of the things that makes yc work. but i didnt know it when we started yc. i only had a few data points our own startup and those started by friends. it was a surprise to me how often the same problems recur in different forms. many later stage investors might never realize this because later stage investors might not advise 100 startups in their whole career but a yc partner will get this much experience in the first year or two.thats one advantage of funding large numbers of early stage companies rather than smaller numbers of laterstage ones. you get a lot of data. not just because youre looking at more companies but also because more goes wrong.but knowing nearly all the problems startups can encounter doesnt mean that advising them can be automated or reduced to a formula. theres no substitute for individual office hours with a yc partner. each startup is unique which means they have to be advised by specific partners who know them well. 1we learned that the hard way in the notorious batch that broke yc in the summer of 2012. up till that point we treated the partners as a pool. when a startup requested office hours they got the next available slot posted by any partner. that meant every partner had to know every startup. this worked fine up to 60 startups but when the batch grew to 80 everything broke. the founders probably didnt realize anything was wrong but the partners were confused and unhappy because halfway through the batch they still didnt know all the companies yet. 2at first i was puzzled. how could things be fine at 60 startups and broken at 80 it was only a third more. then i realized what had happened. we were using an on2 algorithm. so of course it blew up.the solution we adopted was the classic one in these situations. we sharded the batch into smaller groups of startups each overseen by a dedicated group of partners. that fixed the problem and has worked fine ever since. but the batch that broke yc was a powerful demonstration of how individualized the process of advising startups has to be.another related surprise is how bad founders can be at realizing what their problems are. founders will sometimes come in to talk about some problem and well discover another much bigger one in the course of the conversation. for example and this case is all too common founders will come in to talk about the difficulties theyre having raising money and after digging into their situation it turns out the reason is that the company is doing badly and investors can tell. or founders will come in worried that they still havent cracked the problem of user acquisition and the reason turns out to be that their product isnt good enough. there have been times when ive asked would you use this yourself if you hadnt built it and the founders on thinking about it said no. well theres the reason youre having trouble getting users.often founders know what their problems are but not their relative importance. 3 theyll come in to talk about three problems theyre worrying about. one is of moderate importance one doesnt matter at all and one will kill the company if it isnt addressed immediately. its like watching one of those horror movies where the heroine is deeply upset that her boyfriend cheated on her and only mildly curious about the door thats mysteriously ajar. you want to say never mind about your boyfriend think about that door fortunately in office hours you can. so while startups still die with some regularity its rarely because they wandered into a room containing a murderer. the yc partners can warn them where the murderers are.not that founders listen. that was another big surprise how often founders dont listen to us. a couple weeks ago i talked to a partner who had been working for yc for a couple batches and was starting to see the pattern. they come back a year later she said and say we wish wed listened to you.it took me a long time to figure out why founders dont listen. at first i thought it was mere stubbornness. thats part of the reason but another and probably more important reason is that so much about startups is counterintuitive. and when you tell someone something counterintuitive what it sounds to them is wrong. so the reason founders dont listen to us is that they dont believe us. at least not till experience teaches them otherwise. 4the reason startups are so counterintuitive is that theyre so different from most peoples other experiences. no one knows what its like except those whove done it. which is why yc partners should usually have been founders themselves. but strangely enough the counterintuitiveness of startups turns out to be another of the things that make yc work. if it werent counterintuitive founders wouldnt need our advice about how to do it.focus is doubly important for early stage startups because not only do they have a hundred different problems they dont have anyone to work on them except the founders. if the founders focus on things that dont matter theres no one focusing on the things that do. so the essence of what happens at yc is to figure out which problems matter most then cook up ideas for solving them  ideally at a resolution of a week or less  and then try those ideas and measure how well they worked. the focus is on action with measurable nearterm results.this doesnt imply that founders should rush forward regardless of the consequences. if you correct course at a high enough frequency you can be simultaneously decisive at a micro scale and tentative at a macro scale. the result is a somewhat winding path but executed very rapidly like the path a running back takes downfield. and in practice theres less backtracking than you might expect. founders usually guess right about which direction to run in especially if they have someone experienced like a yc partner to bounce their hypotheses off. and when they guess wrong they notice fast because theyll talk about the results at office hours the next week. 5a small improvement in navigational ability can make you a lot faster because it has a double effect the path is shorter and you can travel faster along it when youre more certain its the right one. thats where a lot of ycs value lies in helping founders get an extra increment of focus that lets them move faster. and since moving fast is the essence of a startup yc in effect makes startups more startuplike.speed defines startups. focus enables speed. yc improves focus.why are founders uncertain about what to do partly because startups almost by definition are doing something new which means no one knows how to do it yet or in most cases even what it is. partly because startups are so counterintuitive generally. and partly because many founders especially young and ambitious ones have been trained to win the wrong way. that took me years to figure out. the educational system in most countries trains you to win by hacking the test instead of actually doing whatever its supposed to measure. but that stops working when you start a startup. so part of what yc does is to retrain founders to stop trying to hack the test. it takes a surprisingly long time. a year in you still see them reverting to their old habits.yc is not simply more experienced founders passing on their knowledge. its more like specialization than apprenticeship. the knowledge of the yc partners and the founders have different shapes it wouldnt be worthwhile for a founder to acquire the encyclopedic knowledge of startup problems that a yc partner has just as it wouldnt be worthwhile for a yc partner to acquire the depth of domain knowledge that a founder has. thats why it can still be valuable for an experienced founder to do yc just as it can still be valuable for an experienced athlete to have a coach.the other big thing yc gives founders is colleagues and this may be even more important than the advice of partners. if you look at history great work clusters around certain places and institutions florence in the late 15th century the university of gttingen in the late 19th the new yorker under ross bell labs xerox parc. however good you are good colleagues make you better. indeed very ambitious people probably need colleagues more than anyone else because theyre so starved for them in everyday life.whether or not yc manages one day to be listed alongside those famous clusters it wont be for lack of trying. we were very aware of this historical phenomenon and deliberately designed yc to be one. by this point its not bragging to say that its the biggest cluster of great startup founders. even people trying to attack yc concede that.colleagues and startup founders are two of the most powerful forces in the world so youd expect it to have a big effect to combine them. before yc to the extent people thought about the question at all most assumed they couldnt be combined  that loneliness was the price of independence. that was how it felt to us when we started our own startup in boston in the 1990s. we had a handful of older people we could go to for advice of varying quality but no peers. there was no one we could commiserate with about the misbehavior of investors or speculate with about the future of technology. i often tell founders to make something they themselves want and yc is certainly that it was designed to be exactly what we wanted when we were starting a startup.one thing we wanted was to be able to get seed funding without having to make the rounds of random rich people. that has become a commodity now at least in the us. but great colleagues can never become a commodity because the fact that they cluster in some places means theyre proportionally absent from the rest.something magical happens where they do cluster though. the energy in the room at a yc dinner is like nothing else ive experienced. we would have been happy just to have one or two other startups to talk to. when you have a whole roomful its another thing entirely.yc founders arent just inspired by one another. they also help one another. thats the happiest thing ive learned about startup founders how generous they can be in helping one another. we noticed this in the first batch and consciously designed yc to magnify it. the result is something far more intense than say a university. between the partners the alumni and their batchmates founders are surrounded by people who want to help them and can.notes1 this is why ive never liked it when people refer to yc as a bootcamp. its intense like a bootcamp but the opposite in structure. instead of everyone doing the same thing theyre each talking to yc partners to figure out what their specific startup needs.2 when i say the summer 2012 batch was broken i mean it felt to the partners that something was wrong. things werent yet so broken that the startups had a worse experience. in fact that batch did unusually well.3 this situation reminds me of the research showing that people are much better at answering questions than they are at judging how accurate their answers are. the two phenomena feel very similar.4 the airbnbs were particularly good at listening  partly because they were flexible and disciplined but also because theyd had such a rough time during the preceding year. they were ready to listen.5 the optimal unit of decisiveness depends on how long it takes to get results and that depends on the type of problem youre solving. when youre negotiating with investors it could be a couple days whereas if youre building hardware it could be months.

a few hours before the yahoo acquisition was announced in june 1998 i took a snapshot of viawebs site. i thought it might be interesting to look at one day.the first thing one notices is is how tiny the pages are. screens were a lot smaller in 1998. if i remember correctly our frontpage used to just fit in the size window people typically used then.browsers then ie 6 was still 3 years in the future had few fonts and they werent antialiased. if you wanted to make pages that looked good you had to render display text as images.you may notice a certain similarity between the viaweb and y combinator logos. we did that as an inside joke when we started yc. considering how basic a red circle is it seemed surprising to me when we started viaweb how few other companies used one as their logo. a bit later i realized why.on the company page youll notice a mysterious individual called john mcartyem. robert morris aka rtm was so publicity averse after the worm that he didnt want his name on the site. i managed to get him to agree to a compromise we could use his bio but not his name. he has since relaxed a bit on that point.trevor graduated at about the same time the acquisition closed so in the course of 4 days he went from impecunious grad student to millionaire phd. the culmination of my career as a writer of press releases was one celebrating his graduation illustrated with a drawing i did of him during a meeting.trevor also appears as trevino bagwell in our directory of web designers merchants could hire to build stores for them. we inserted him as a ringer in case some competitor tried to spam our web designers. we assumed his logo would deter any actual customers but it did not.back in the 90s to get users you had to get mentioned in magazines and newspapers. there were not the same ways to get found online that there are today. so we used to pay a pr firm 16000 a month to get us mentioned in the press. fortunately reporters liked us.in our advice about getting traffic from search engines i dont think the term seo had been coined yet we say there are only 7 that matter yahoo altavista excite webcrawler infoseek lycos and hotbot. notice anything missing google was incorporated that september.we supported online transactions via a company called cybercash since if we lacked that feature wed have gotten beaten up in product comparisons. but cybercash was so bad and most stores order volumes were so low that it was better if merchants processed orders like phone orders. we had a page in our site trying to talk merchants out of doing real time authorizations.the whole site was organized like a funnel directing people to the test drive. it was a novel thing to be able to try out software online. we put cgibin in our dynamic urls to fool competitors about how our software worked.we had some well known users. needless to say fredericks of hollywood got the most traffic. we charged a flat fee of 300month for big stores so it was a little alarming to have users who got lots of traffic. i once calculated how much fredericks was costing us in bandwidth and it was about 300month.since we hosted all the stores which together were getting just over 10 million page views per month in june 1998 we consumed what at the time seemed a lot of bandwidth. we had 2 t1s 3 mbsec coming into our offices. in those days there was no aws. even colocating servers seemed too risky considering how often things went wrong with them. so we had our servers in our offices. or more precisely in trevors office. in return for the unique privilege of sharing his office with no other humans he had to share it with 6 shrieking tower servers. his office was nicknamed the hot tub on account of the heat they generated. most days his stack of window air conditioners could keep up.for describing pages we had a template language called rtml which supposedly stood for something but which in fact i named after rtm. rtml was common lisp augmented by some macros and libraries and concealed under a structure editor that made it look like it had syntax.since we did continuous releases our software didnt actually have versions. but in those days the trade press expected versions so we made them up. if we wanted to get lots of attention we made the version number an integer. that version 4.0 icon was generated by our own button generator incidentally. the whole viaweb site was made with our software even though it wasnt an online store because we wanted to experience what our users did.at the end of 1997 we released a general purpose shopping search engine called shopfind. it was pretty advanced for the time. it had a programmable crawler that could crawl most of the different stores online and pick out the products.

the word prig isnt very common now but if you look up the definition it will sound familiar. googles isnt bada selfrighteously moralistic person who behaves as if superior to others.this sense of the word originated in the 18th century and its age is an important clue it shows that although wokeness is a comparatively recent phenomenon its an instance of a much older one.theres a certain kind of person whos attracted to a shallow exacting kind of moral purity and who demonstrates his purity by attacking anyone who breaks the rules. every society has these people. all that changes is the rules they enforce. in victorian england it was christian virtue. in stalins russia it was orthodox marxismleninism. for the woke its social justice.so if you want to understand wokeness the question to ask is not why people behave this way. every society has prigs. the question to ask is why our prigs are priggish about these ideas at this moment. and to answer that we have to ask when and where wokeness began.the answer to the first question is the 1980s. wokeness is a second more aggressive wave of political correctness which started in the late 1980s died down in the late 1990s and then returned with a vengeance in the early 2010s finally peaking after the riots of 2020.what was political correctness exactly im often asked to define both this term and wokeness by people who think theyre meaningless labels so i will. they both have the same definitionan aggressively performative focus on social justice.in other words its people being prigs about social justice. and thats the real problem  the performativeness not the social justice. 0racism for example is a genuine problem. not a problem on the scale that the woke believe it to be but a genuine one. i dont think any reasonable person would deny that. the problem with political correctness was not that it focused on marginalized groups but the shallow aggressive way in which it did so. instead of going out into the world and quietly helping members of marginalized groups the politically correct focused on getting people in trouble for using the wrong words to talk about them.as for where political correctness began if you think about it you probably already know the answer. did it begin outside universities and spread to them from this external source obviously not it has always been most extreme in universities. so where in universities did it begin did it begin in math or the hard sciences or engineering and spread from there to the humanities and social sciences those are amusing images but no obviously it began in the humanities and social sciences.why there and why then what happened in the humanities and social sciences in the 1980sa successful theory of the origin of political correctness has to be able to explain why it didnt happen earlier. why didnt it happen during the protest movements of the 1960s for example they were concerned with much the same issues. 1the reason the student protests of the 1960s didnt lead to political correctness was precisely that  they were student movements. they didnt have any real power. the students may have been talking a lot about womens liberation and black power but it was not what they were being taught in their classes. not yet.but in the early 1970s the student protestors of the 1960s began to finish their dissertations and get hired as professors. at first they were neither powerful nor numerous. but as more of their peers joined them and the previous generation of professors started to retire they gradually became both.the reason political correctness began in the humanities and social sciences was that these fields offered more scope for the injection of politics. a 1960s radical who got a job as a physics professor could still attend protests but his political beliefs wouldnt affect his work. whereas research in sociology and modern literature can be made as political as you like. 2i saw political correctness arise. when i started college in 1982 it was not yet a thing. female students might object if someone said something they considered sexist but no one was getting reported for it. it was still not a thing when i started grad school in 1986. it was definitely a thing in 1988 though and by the early 1990s it seemed to pervade campus life.what happened how did protest become punishment why were the late 1980s the point at which protests against male chauvinism as it used to be called morphed into formal complaints to university authorities about sexism basically the 1960s radicals got tenure. they became the establishment theyd protested against two decades before. now they were in a position not just to speak out about their ideas but to enforce them.a new set of moral rules to enforce was exciting news to a certain kind of student. what made it particularly exciting was that they were allowed to attack professors. i remember noticing that aspect of political correctness at the time. it wasnt simply a grassroots student movement. it was faculty members encouraging students to attack other faculty members. in that respect it was like the cultural revolution. that wasnt a grassroots movement either that was mao unleashing the younger generation on his political opponents. and in fact when roderick macfarquhar started teaching a class on the cultural revolution at harvard in the late 1980s many saw it as a comment on current events. i dont know if it actually was but people thought it was and that means the similarities were obvious. 3college students larp. its their nature. its usually harmless. but larping morality turned out to be a poisonous combination. the result was a kind of moral etiquette superficial but very complicated. imagine having to explain to a wellmeaning visitor from another planet why using the phrase people of color is considered particularly enlightened but saying colored people gets you fired. and why exactly one isnt supposed to use the word negro now even though martin luther king used it constantly in his speeches. there are no underlying principles. youd just have to give him a long list of rules to memorize. 4the danger of these rules was not just that they created land mines for the unwary but that their elaborateness made them an effective substitute for virtue. whenever a society has a concept of heresy and orthodoxy orthodoxy becomes a substitute for virtue. you can be the worst person in the world but as long as youre orthodox youre better than everyone who isnt. this makes orthodoxy very attractive to bad people.but for it to work as a substitute for virtue orthodoxy must be difficult. if all you have to do to be orthodox is wear some garment or avoid saying some word everyone knows to do it and the only way to seem more virtuous than other people is to actually be virtuous. the shallow complicated and frequently changing rules of political correctness made it the perfect substitute for actual virtue. and the result was a world in which good people who werent up to date on current moral fashions were brought down by people whose characters would make you recoil in horror if you could see them.one big contributing factor in the rise of political correctness was the lack of other things to be morally pure about. previous generations of prigs had been prigs mostly about religion and sex. but among the cultural elite these were the deadest of dead letters by the 1980s if you were religious or a virgin this was something you tended to conceal rather than advertise. so the sort of people who enjoy being moral enforcers had become starved of things to enforce. a new set of rules was just what theyd been waiting for.curiously enough the tolerant side of the 1960s left helped create the conditions in which the intolerant side prevailed. the relaxed social rules advocated by the old easygoing hippy left became the dominant ones at least among the elite and this left nothing for the naturally intolerant to be intolerant about.another possibly contributing factor was the fall of the soviet empire. marxism had been a popular focus of moral purity on the left before political correctness emerged as a competitor but the prodemocracy movements in eastern bloc countries took most of the shine off it. especially the fall of the berlin wall in 1989. you couldnt be on the side of the stasi. i remember looking at the moribund soviet studies section of a used bookshop in cambridge in the late 1980s and thinking what will those people go on about now as it turned out the answer was right under my nose.one thing i noticed at the time about the first phase of political correctness was that it was more popular with women than men. as many writers perhaps most eloquently george orwell have observed women seem more attracted than men to the idea of being moral enforcers. but there was another more specific reason women tended to be the enforcers of political correctness. there was at this time a great backlash against sexual harassment the mid 1980s were the point when the definition of sexual harassment was expanded from explicit sexual advances to creating a hostile environment. within universities the classic form of accusation was for a female student to say that a professor made her feel uncomfortable. but the vagueness of this accusation allowed the radius of forbidden behavior to expand to include talking about heterodox ideas. those make people uncomfortable too. 5was it sexist to propose that darwins greater male variability hypothesis might explain some variation in human performance sexist enough to get larry summers pushed out as president of harvard apparently. one woman who heard the talk in which he mentioned this idea said it made her feel physically ill and that she had to leave halfway through. if the test of a hostile environment is how it makes people feel this certainly sounds like one. and yet it does seem plausible that greater male variability explains some of the variation in human performance. so which should prevail comfort or truth surely if truth should prevail anywhere it should be in universities thats supposed to be their specialty but for decades starting in the late 1980s the politically correct tried to pretend this conflict didnt exist. 6political correctness seemed to burn out in the second half of the 1990s. one reason perhaps the main reason was that it literally became a joke. it offered rich material for comedians who performed their usual disinfectant action upon it. humor is one of the most powerful weapons against priggishness of any sort because prigs being humorless cant respond in kind. humor was what defeated victorian prudishness and by 2000 it seemed to have done the same thing to political correctness.unfortunately this was an illusion. within universities the embers of political correctness were still glowing brightly. after all the forces that created it were still there. the professors who started it were now becoming deans and department heads. and in addition to their departments there were now a bunch of new ones explicitly focused on social justice. students were still hungry for things to be morally pure about. and there had been an explosion in the number of university administrators many of whose jobs involved enforcing various forms of political correctness.in the early 2010s the embers of political correctness burst into flame anew. there were several differences between this new phase and the original one. it was more virulent. it spread further into the real world although it still burned hottest within universities. and it was concerned with a wider variety of sins. in the first phase of political correctness there were really only three things people got accused of sexism racism and homophobia which at the time was a neologism invented for the purpose. but between then and 2010 a lot of people had spent a lot of time trying to invent new kinds of isms and phobias and seeing which could be made to stick.the second phase was in multiple senses political correctness metastasized. why did it happen when it did my guess is that it was due to the rise of social media particularly tumblr and twitter because one of the most distinctive features of the second wave of political correctness was the cancel mob a mob of angry people uniting on social media to get someone ostracized or fired. indeed this second wave of political correctness was originally called cancel culture it didnt start to be called wokeness till the 2020s.one aspect of social media that surprised almost everyone at first was the popularity of outrage. users seemed to like being outraged. were so used to this idea now that we take it for granted but really its pretty strange. being outraged is not a pleasant feeling. you wouldnt expect people to seek it out. but they do. and above all they want to share it. i happened to be running a forum from 2007 to 2014 so i can actually quantify how much they want to share it our users were about three times more likely to upvote something if it outraged them.this tilt toward outrage wasnt due to wokeness. its an inherent feature of social media or at least this generation of it. but it did make social media the perfect mechanism for fanning the flames of wokeness. 7it wasnt just public social networks that drove the rise of wokeness though. group chat apps were also critical especially in the final step cancellation. imagine if a group of employees trying to get someone fired had to do it using only email. it would be hard to organize a mob. but once you have group chat mobs form naturally.another contributing factor in this second wave of political correctness was the dramatic increase in the polarization of the press. in the print era newspapers were constrained to be or at least seem politically neutral. the department stores that ran ads in the new york times wanted to reach everyone in the region both liberal and conservative so the times had to serve both. but the times didnt regard this neutrality as something forced upon them. they embraced it as their duty as a paper of record  as one of the big newspapers that aimed to be chronicles of their times reporting every sufficiently important story from a neutral point of view.when i grew up the papers of record seemed timeless almost sacred institutions. papers like the new york times and washington post had immense prestige partly because other sources of news were limited but also because they did make some effort to be neutral.unfortunately it turned out that the paper of record was mostly an artifact of the constraints imposed by print. 8 when your market was determined by geography you had to be neutral. but publishing online enabled  in fact probably forced  newspapers to switch to serving markets defined by ideology instead of geography. most that remained in business fell in the direction theyd already been leaning left. on october 11 2020 the new york times announced that the paper is in the midst of an evolution from the stodgy paper of record into a juicy collection of great narratives. 9 meanwhile journalists of a sort had arisen to serve the right as well. and so journalism which in the previous era had been one of the great centralizing forces now became one of the great polarizing ones.the rise of social media and the increasing polarization of journalism reinforced one another. in fact there arose a new variety of journalism involving a loop through social media. someone would say something controversial on social media. within hours it would become a news story. outraged readers would then post links to the story on social media driving further arguments online. it was the cheapest source of clicks imaginable. you didnt have to maintain overseas news bureaus or pay for monthlong investigations. all you had to do was watch twitter for controversial remarks and repost them on your site with some additional comments to inflame readers further.for the press there was money in wokeness. but they werent the only ones. that was one of the biggest differences between the two waves of political correctness the first was driven almost entirely by amateurs but the second was often driven by professionals. for some it was their whole job. by 2010 a new class of administrators had arisen whose job was basically to enforce wokeness. they played a role similar to that of the political commissars who got attached to military and industrial organizations in the ussr they werent directly in the flow of the organizations work but watched from the side to ensure that nothing improper happened in the doing of it. these new administrators could often be recognized by the word inclusion in their titles. within institutions this was the preferred euphemism for wokeness a new list of banned words for example would usually be called an inclusive language guide. 10this new class of bureaucrats pursued a woke agenda as if their jobs depended on it because they did. if you hire people to keep watch for a particular type of problem theyre going to find it because otherwise theres no justification for their existence. 11 but these bureaucrats also represented a second and possibly even greater danger. many were involved in hiring and when possible they tried to ensure their employers hired only people who shared their political beliefs. the most egregious cases were the new dei statements that some universities started to require from faculty candidates proving their commitment to wokeness. some universities used these statements as the initial filter and only even considered candidates who scored high enough on them. youre not hiring einstein that way imagine what you get instead.another factor in the rise of wokeness was the black lives matter movement which started in 2013 when a white man was acquitted after killing a black teenager in florida. but this didnt launch wokeness it was well underway by 2013.similarly for the me too movement which took off in 2017 after the first news stories about harvey weinsteins history of raping women. it accelerated wokeness but didnt play the same role in launching it that the 80s version did in launching political correctness.the election of donald trump in 2016 also accelerated wokeness particularly in the press where outrage now meant traffic. trump made the new york times a lot of money headlines during his first administration mentioned his name at about four times the rate of previous presidents.in 2020 we saw the biggest accelerant of all after a white police officer asphyxiated a black suspect on video. at this point the metaphorical fire became a literal one as violent protests broke out across america. but in retrospect this turned out to be peak woke or close to it. by every measure ive seen wokeness peaked in 2020 or 2021.wokeness is sometimes described as a mindvirus. what makes it viral is that it defines new types of impropriety. most people are afraid of impropriety theyre never exactly sure what the social rules are or which ones they might be breaking. especially if the rules change rapidly. and since most people already worry that they might be breaking rules they dont know about if you tell them theyre breaking a rule their default reaction is to believe you. especially if multiple people tell them. which in turn is a recipe for exponential growth. zealots invent some new impropriety to avoid. the first people to adopt it are fellow zealots eager for new ways to signal their virtue. if there are enough of these the initial group of zealots is followed by a much larger group motivated by fear. theyre not trying to signal virtue theyre just trying to avoid getting in trouble. at this point the new impropriety is now firmly established. plus its success has increased the rate of change in social rules which remember is one of the reasons people are nervous about which rules they might be breaking. so the cycle accelerates. 12whats true of individuals is even more true of organizations. especially organizations without a powerful leader. such organizations do everything based on best practices. theres no higher authority if some new best practice achieves critical mass they must adopt it. and in this case the organization cant do what it usually does when its uncertain delay. it might be committing improprieties right now so its surprisingly easy for a small group of zealots to capture this type of organization by describing new improprieties it might be guilty of. 13how does this kind of cycle ever end eventually it leads to disaster and people start to say enough is enough. the excesses of 2020 made a lot of people say that.since then wokeness has been in gradual but continual retreat. corporate ceos starting with brian armstrong have openly rejected it. universities led by the university of chicago and mit have explicitly confirmed their commitment to free speech. twitter which was arguably the hub of wokeness was bought by elon musk in order to neutralize it and he seems to have succeeded  and not incidentally by censoring leftwing users the way twitter used to censor rightwing ones but without censoring either. 14 consumers have emphatically rejected brands that ventured too far into wokeness. the bud light brand may have been permanently damaged by it. im not going to claim trumps second victory in 2024 was a referendum on wokeness i think he won as presidential candidates always do because he was more charismatic but voters disgust with wokeness must have helped.so what do we do now wokeness is already in retreat. obviously we should help it along. whats the best way to do that and more importantly how do we avoid a third outbreak after all it seemed to be dead once but came back worse than ever.in fact theres an even more ambitious goal is there a way to prevent any similar outbreak of aggressively performative moralism in the future  not just a third outbreak of political correctness but the next thing like it because there will be a next thing. prigs are prigs by nature. they need rules to obey and enforce and now that darwin has cut off their traditional supply of rules theyre constantly hungry for new ones. all they need is someone to meet them halfway by defining a new way to be morally pure and well see the same phenomenon again.lets start with the easier problem. is there a simple principled way to deal with wokeness i think there is to use the customs we already have for dealing with religion. wokeness is effectively a religion just with god replaced by protected classes. its not even the first religion of this kind marxism had a similar form with god replaced by the masses. 15 and we already have wellestablished customs for dealing with religion within organizations. you can express your own religious identity and explain your beliefs but you cant call your coworkers infidels if they disagree or try to ban them from saying things that contradict its doctrines or insist that the organization adopt yours as its official religion.if were not sure what to do about any particular manifestation of wokeness imagine we were dealing with some other religion like christianity. should we have people within organizations whose jobs are to enforce woke orthodoxy no because we wouldnt have people whose jobs were to enforce christian orthodoxy. should we censor writers or scientists whose work contradicts woke doctrines no because we wouldnt do this to people whose work contradicted christian teachings. should job candidates be required to write dei statements of course not imagine an employer requiring proof of ones religious beliefs. should students and employees have to participate in woke indoctrination sessions in which theyre required to answer questions about their beliefs to ensure compliance no because we wouldnt dream of catechizing people in this way about their religion. 16one shouldnt feel bad about not wanting to watch woke movies any more than one would feel bad about not wanting to listen to christian rock. in my twenties i drove across america several times listening to local radio stations. occasionally id turn the dial and hear some new song. but the moment anyone mentioned jesus id turn the dial again. even the tiniest bit of being preached to was enough to make me lose interest.but by the same token we should not automatically reject everything the woke believe. im not a christian but i can see that many christian principles are good ones. it would be a mistake to discard them all just because one didnt share the religion that espoused them. it would be the sort of thing a religious zealot would do.if we have genuine pluralism i think well be safe from future outbreaks of woke intolerance. wokeness itself wont go away. there will for the foreseeable future continue to be pockets of woke zealots inventing new moral fashions. the key is not to let them treat their fashions as normative. they can change what their coreligionists are allowed to say every few months if they like but they mustnt be allowed to change what were allowed to say. 17the more general problem  how to prevent similar outbreaks of aggressively performative moralism  is of course harder. here were up against human nature. there will always be prigs. and in particular there will always be the enforcers among them the aggressively conventionalminded. these people are born that way. every society has them. so the best we can do is to keep them bottled up.the aggressively conventionalminded arent always on the rampage. usually they just enforce whatever random rules are nearest to hand. they only become dangerous when some new ideology gets a lot of them pointed in the same direction at once. thats what happened during the cultural revolution and to a lesser extent thank god in the two waves of political correctness weve experienced.we cant get rid of the aggressively conventionalminded. 18 and we couldnt prevent people from creating new ideologies that appealed to them even if we wanted to. so if we want to keep them bottled up we have to do it one step downstream. fortunately when the aggressively conventionalminded go on the rampage they always do one thing that gives them away they define new heresies to punish people for. so the best way to protect ourselves from future outbreaks of things like wokeness is to have powerful antibodies against the concept of heresy.we should have a conscious bias against defining new forms of heresy. whenever anyone tries to ban saying something that wed previously been able to say our initial assumption should be that theyre wrong. only our initial assumption of course. if they can prove we should stop saying it then we should. but the burden of proof is on them. in liberal democracies people trying to prevent something from being said will usually claim theyre not merely engaging in censorship but trying to prevent some form of harm. and maybe theyre right. but once again the burden of proof is on them. its not enough to claim harm they have to prove it.as long as the aggressively conventionalminded continue to give themselves away by banning heresies well always be able to notice when they become aligned behind some new ideology. and if we always fight back at that point with any luck we can stop them in their tracks.the number of true things we cant say should not increase. if it does something is wrong.notes0 this was not the original meaning of woke but its rarely used in the original sense now. now the pejorative sense is the dominant one.1 why did 1960s radicals focus on the causes they did one of the people who reviewed drafts of this essay explained this so well that i asked if i could quote himthe middleclass student protestors of the new left rejected the socialistmarxist left as unhip. they were interested in sexier forms of oppression uncovered by cultural analysis marcuse and abstruse theory. labor politics became stodgy and oldfashioned. this took a couple generations to work through. the woke ideologys conspicuous lack of interest in the working class is the telltale sign. such fragments as are er left of the old left are antiwoke and meanwhile the actual working class shifted to the populist right and gave us trump. trump and wokeness are cousins.the middleclass origins of wokeness smoothed its way through the institutions because it had no interest in seizing the means of production how quaint such phrases seem now which would quickly have run up against hard state and corporate power. the fact that wokeness only expressed interest in other kinds of class race sex etc signalled compromise with existing power give us power within your system and well bestow the resource we control  moral rectitude  upon you. as an ideological stalking horse for gaining control over discourse and institutions this succeeded where a more ambitious revolutionary program would not have.2 it helped that the humanities and social sciences also included some of the biggest and easiest undergrad majors. if a political movement had to start with physics students it could never get off the ground there would be too few of them and they wouldnt have the time to spare.at the top universities these majors are not as big as they used to be though. a 2022 survey found that only 7 of harvard undergrads plan to major in the humanities vs nearly 30 during the 1970s. i expect wokeness is at least part of the reason when undergrads consider majoring in english its presumably because they love the written word and not because they want to listen to lectures about racism.3 the puppetmasterandpuppet character of political correctness became clearly visible when a bakery near oberlin college was falsely accused of race discrimination in 2016. in the subsequent civil trial lawyers for the bakery produced a text message from oberlin dean of students meredith raimondo that read id say unleash the students if i wasnt convinced this needs to be put behind us.4 the woke sometimes claim that wokeness is simply treating people with respect. but if it were that would be the only rule youd have to remember and this is comically far from being the case. my younger son likes to imitate voices and at one point when he was about seven i had to explain which accents it was currently safe to imitate publicly and which not. it took about ten minutes and i still hadnt covered all the cases.5 in 1986 the supreme court ruled that creating a hostile work environment could constitute sex discrimination which in turn affected universities via title ix. the court specified that the test of a hostile environment was whether it would bother a reasonable person but since for a professor merely being the subject of a sexual harassment complaint would be a disaster whether the complainant was reasonable or not in practice any joke or remark remotely connected with sex was now effectively forbidden. which meant wed now come full circle to victorian codes of behavior when there was a large class of things that might not be said with ladies present.6 much as they tried to pretend there was no conflict between diversity and quality. but you cant simultaneously optimize for two things that arent identical. what diversity actually means judging from the way the term is used is proportional representation and unless youre selecting a group whose purpose is to be representative like poll respondents optimizing for proportional representation has to come at the expense of quality. this is not because of anything about representation its the nature of optimization optimizing for x has to come at the expense of y unless x and y are identical.7 maybe societies will eventually develop antibodies to viral outrage. maybe we were just the first to be exposed to it so it tore through us like an epidemic through a previously isolated population. im fairly confident that it would be possible to create new social media apps that were less driven by outrage and an app of this type would have a good chance of stealing users from existing ones because the smartest people would tend to migrate to it.8 i say mostly because i have hopes that journalistic neutrality will return in some form. there is some market for unbiased news and while it may be small its valuable. the rich and powerful want to know whats really going on thats how they became rich and powerful.9 the times made this momentous announcement very informally in passing in the middle of an article about a times reporter whod been criticized for inaccuracy. its quite possible no senior editor even approved it. but its somehow appropriate that this particular universe ended with a whimper rather than a bang.10 as the acronym dei goes out of fashion many of these bureaucrats will try to go underground by changing their titles. it looks like belonging will be a popular option.11 if youve ever wondered why our legal system includes protections like the separation of prosecutor judge and jury the right to examine evidence and crossexamine witnesses and the right to be represented by legal counsel the de facto parallel legal system established by title ix makes that all too clear.12 the invention of new improprieties is most visible in the rapid evolution of woke nomenclature. this is particularly annoying to me as a writer because the new names are always worse. any religious observance has to be inconvenient and slightly absurd otherwise gentiles would do it too. so slaves becomes enslaved individuals. but web search can show us the leading edge of moral growth in real time if you search for individuals experiencing slavery you will as of this writing find five legit attempts to use the phrase and youll even find two for individuals experiencing enslavement.13 organizations that do dubious things are particularly concerned with propriety which is how you end up with absurdities like tobacco and oil companies having higher esg ratings than tesla.14 elon did something else that tilted twitter rightward though he gave more visibility to paying users. paying users lean right on average because people on the far left dislike elon and dont want to give him money. elon presumably knew this would happen. on the other hand the people on the far left have only themselves to blame they could tilt twitter back to the left tomorrow if they wanted to.15 it even as james lindsay and peter boghossian pointed out has a concept of original sin privilege. which means unlike christianitys egalitarian version people have varying degrees of it. an ablebodied straight white american male is born with such a load of sin that only by the most abject repentance can he be saved.wokeness also shares something rather funny with many actual versions of christianity like god the people for whose sake wokeness purports to act are often revolted by the things done in their name.16 there is one exception to most of these rules actual religious organizations. its reasonable for them to insist on orthodoxy. but they in turn should declare that theyre religious organizations. its rightly considered shady when something that appears to be an ordinary business or publication turns out to be a religious organization.17 i dont want to give the impression that it will be simple to roll back wokeness. there will be places where the fight inevitably gets messy  particularly within universities which everyone has to share yet which are currently the most pervaded by wokeness of any institutions.18 you can however get rid of aggressively conventionalminded people within an organization and in many if not most organizations this would be an excellent idea. even a handful of them can do a lot of damage. i bet youd feel a noticeable improvement going from a handful to none.

writing about something even something you know well usually shows you that you didnt know it as well as you thought. putting ideas into words is a severe test. the first words you choose are usually wrong you have to rewrite sentences over and over to get them exactly right. and your ideas wont just be imprecise but incomplete too. half the ideas that end up in an essay will be ones you thought of while you were writing it. indeed thats why i write them.once you publish something the convention is that whatever you wrote was what you thought before you wrote it. these were your ideas and now youve expressed them. but you know this isnt true. you know that putting your ideas into words changed them. and not just the ideas you published. presumably there were others that turned out to be too broken to fix and those you discarded instead.its not just having to commit your ideas to specific words that makes writing so exacting. the real test is reading what youve written. you have to pretend to be a neutral reader who knows nothing of whats in your head only what you wrote. when he reads what you wrote does it seem correct does it seem complete if you make an effort you can read your writing as if you were a complete stranger and when you do the news is usually bad. it takes me many cycles before i can get an essay past the stranger. but the stranger is rational so you always can if you ask him what he needs. if hes not satisfied because you failed to mention x or didnt qualify some sentence sufficiently then you mention x or add more qualifications. happy now it may cost you some nice sentences but you have to resign yourself to that. you just have to make them as good as you can and still satisfy the stranger.this much i assume wont be that controversial. i think it will accord with the experience of anyone who has tried to write about anything nontrivial. there may exist people whose thoughts are so perfectly formed that they just flow straight into words. but ive never known anyone who could do this and if i met someone who said they could it would seem evidence of their limitations rather than their ability. indeed this is a trope in movies the guy who claims to have a plan for doing some difficult thing and who when questioned further taps his head and says its all up here. everyone watching the movie knows what that means. at best the plan is vague and incomplete. very likely theres some undiscovered flaw that invalidates it completely. at best its a plan for a plan.in precisely defined domains its possible to form complete ideas in your head. people can play chess in their heads for example. and mathematicians can do some amount of math in their heads though they dont seem to feel sure of a proof over a certain length till they write it down. but this only seems possible with ideas you can express in a formal language. 1 arguably what such people are doing is putting ideas into words in their heads. i can to some extent write essays in my head. ill sometimes think of a paragraph while walking or lying in bed that survives nearly unchanged in the final version. but really im writing when i do this. im doing the mental part of writing my fingers just arent moving as i do it. 2you can know a great deal about something without writing about it. can you ever know so much that you wouldnt learn more from trying to explain what you know i dont think so. ive written about at least two subjects i know well  lisp hacking and startups  and in both cases i learned a lot from writing about them. in both cases there were things i didnt consciously realize till i had to explain them. and i dont think my experience was anomalous. a great deal of knowledge is unconscious and experts have if anything a higher proportion of unconscious knowledge than beginners.im not saying that writing is the best way to explore all ideas. if you have ideas about architecture presumably the best way to explore them is to build actual buildings. what im saying is that however much you learn from exploring ideas in other ways youll still learn new things from writing about them.putting ideas into words doesnt have to mean writing of course. you can also do it the old way by talking. but in my experience writing is the stricter test. you have to commit to a single optimal sequence of words. less can go unsaid when you dont have tone of voice to carry meaning. and you can focus in a way that would seem excessive in conversation. ill often spend 2 weeks on an essay and reread drafts 50 times. if you did that in conversation it would seem evidence of some kind of mental disorder. if youre lazy of course writing and talking are equally useless. but if you want to push yourself to get things right writing is the steeper hill. 3the reason ive spent so long establishing this rather obvious point is that it leads to another that many people will find shocking. if writing down your ideas always makes them more precise and more complete then no one who hasnt written about a topic has fully formed ideas about it. and someone who never writes has no fully formed ideas about anything nontrivial.it feels to them as if they do especially if theyre not in the habit of critically examining their own thinking. ideas can feel complete. its only when you try to put them into words that you discover theyre not. so if you never subject your ideas to that test youll not only never have fully formed ideas but also never realize it.putting ideas into words is certainly no guarantee that theyll be right. far from it. but though its not a sufficient condition it is a necessary one.

successful people tend to be persistent. new ideas often dont work at first but theyre not deterred. they keep trying and eventually find something that does.mere obstinacy on the other hand is a recipe for failure. obstinate people are so annoying. they wont listen. they beat their heads against a wall and get nowhere.but is there any real difference between these two cases are persistent and obstinate people actually behaving differently or are they doing the same thing and we just label them later as persistent or obstinate depending on whether they turned out to be right or notif thats the only difference then theres nothing to be learned from the distinction. telling someone to be persistent rather than obstinate would just be telling them to be right rather than wrong and they already know that. whereas if persistence and obstinacy are actually different kinds of behavior it would be worthwhile to tease them apart. 1ive talked to a lot of determined people and it seems to me that theyre different kinds of behavior. ive often walked away from a conversation thinking either wow that guy is determined or damn that guy is stubborn and i dont think im just talking about whether they seemed right or not. thats part of it but not all of it.theres something annoying about the obstinate thats not simply due to being mistaken. they wont listen. and thats not true of all determined people. i cant think of anyone more determined than the collison brothers and when you point out a problem to them they not only listen but listen with an almost predatory intensity. is there a hole in the bottom of their boat probably not but if there is they want to know about it.its the same with most successful people. theyre never more engaged than when you disagree with them. whereas the obstinate dont want to hear you. when you point out problems their eyes glaze over and their replies sound like ideologues talking about matters of doctrine. 2the reason the persistent and the obstinate seem similar is that theyre both hard to stop. but theyre hard to stop in different senses. the persistent are like boats whose engines cant be throttled back. the obstinate are like boats whose rudders cant be turned. 3in the degenerate case theyre indistinguishable when theres only one way to solve a problem your only choice is whether to give up or not and persistence and obstinacy both say no. this is presumably why the two are so often conflated in popular culture. it assumes simple problems. but as problems get more complicated we can see the difference between them. the persistent are much more attached to points high in the decision tree than to minor ones lower down while the obstinate spray dont give up indiscriminately over the whole tree.the persistent are attached to the goal. the obstinate are attached to their ideas about how to reach it.worse still that means theyll tend to be attached to their first ideas about how to solve a problem even though these are the least informed by the experience of working on it. so the obstinate arent merely attached to details but disproportionately likely to be attached to wrong ones.why are they like this why are the obstinate obstinate one possibility is that theyre overwhelmed. theyre not very capable. they take on a hard problem. theyre immediately in over their head. so they grab onto ideas the way someone on the deck of a rolling ship might grab onto the nearest handhold.that was my initial theory but on examination it doesnt hold up. if being obstinate were simply a consequence of being in over ones head you could make persistent people become obstinate by making them solve harder problems. but thats not what happens. if you handed the collisons an extremely hard problem to solve they wouldnt become obstinate. if anything theyd become less obstinate. theyd know they had to be open to anything.similarly if obstinacy were caused by the situation the obstinate would stop being obstinate when solving easier problems. but they dont. and if obstinacy isnt caused by the situation it must come from within. it must be a feature of ones personality.obstinacy is a reflexive resistance to changing ones ideas. this is not identical with stupidity but theyre closely related. a reflexive resistance to changing ones ideas becomes a sort of induced stupidity as contrary evidence mounts. and obstinacy is a form of not giving up thats easily practiced by the stupid. you dont have to consider complicated tradeoffs you just dig in your heels. it even works up to a point.the fact that obstinacy works for simple problems is an important clue. persistence and obstinacy arent opposites. the relationship between them is more like the relationship between the two kinds of respiration we can do aerobic respiration and the anaerobic respiration we inherited from our most distant ancestors. anaerobic respiration is a more primitive process but it has its uses. when you leap suddenly away from a threat thats what youre using.the optimal amount of obstinacy is not zero. it can be good if your initial reaction to a setback is an unthinking i wont give up because this helps prevent panic. but unthinking only gets you so far. the further someone is toward the obstinate end of the continuum the less likely they are to succeed in solving hard problems. 4obstinacy is a simple thing. animals have it. but persistence turns out to have a fairly complicated internal structure.one thing that distinguishes the persistent is their energy. at the risk of putting too much weight on words they persist rather than merely resisting. they keep trying things. which means the persistent must also be imaginative. to keep trying things you have to keep thinking of things to try.energy and imagination make a wonderful combination. each gets the best out of the other. energy creates demand for the ideas produced by imagination which thus produces more and imagination gives energy somewhere to go. 5merely having energy and imagination is quite rare. but to solve hard problems you need three more qualities resilience good judgement and a focus on some kind of goal.resilience means not having ones morale destroyed by setbacks. setbacks are inevitable once problems reach a certain size so if you cant bounce back from them you can only do good work on a small scale. but resilience is not the same as obstinacy. resilience means setbacks cant change your morale not that they cant change your mind.indeed persistence often requires that one change ones mind. thats where good judgement comes in. the persistent are quite rational. they focus on expected value. its this not recklessness that lets them work on things that are unlikely to succeed.there is one point at which the persistent are often irrational though at the very top of the decision tree. when they choose between two problems of roughly equal expected value the choice usually comes down to personal preference. indeed theyll often classify projects into deliberately wide bands of expected value in order to ensure that the one they want to work on still qualifies.empirically this doesnt seem to be a problem. its ok to be irrational near the top of the decision tree. one reason is that we humans will work harder on a problem we love. but theres another more subtle factor involved as well our preferences among problems arent random. when we love a problem that other people dont its often because weve unconsciously noticed that its more important than they realize.which leads to our fifth quality there needs to be some overall goal. if youre like me you began as a kid merely with the desire to do something great. in theory that should be the most powerful motivator of all since it includes everything that could possibly be done. but in practice its not much use precisely because it includes too much. it doesnt tell you what to do at this moment.so in practice your energy and imagination and resilience and good judgement have to be directed toward some fairly specific goal. not too specific or you might miss a great discovery adjacent to what youre searching for but not too general or it wont work to motivate you. 6when you look at the internal structure of persistence it doesnt resemble obstinacy at all. its so much more complex. five distinct qualities  energy imagination resilience good judgement and focus on a goal  combine to produce a phenomenon that seems a bit like obstinacy in the sense that it causes you not to give up. but the way you dont give up is completely different. instead of merely resisting change youre driven toward a goal by energy and resilience through paths discovered by imagination and optimized by judgement. youll give way on any point low down in the decision tree if its expected value drops sufficiently but energy and resilience keep pushing you toward whatever you chose higher up.considering what its made of its not surprising that the right kind of stubbornness is so much rarer than the wrong kind or that it gets so much better results. anyone can do obstinacy. indeed kids and drunks and fools are best at it. whereas very few people have enough of all five of the qualities that produce the right kind of stubbornness but when they do the results are magical.notes1 im going to use persistent for the good kind of stubborn and obstinate for the bad kind but i cant claim im simply following current usage. conventional opinion barely distinguishes between good and bad kinds of stubbornness and usage is correspondingly promiscuous. i could have invented a new word for the good kind but it seemed better just to stretch persistent.2 there are some domains where one can succeed by being obstinate. some political leaders have been notorious for it. but it wont work in situations where you have to pass external tests. and indeed the political leaders who are famous for being obstinate are famous for getting power not for using it well.3 there will be some resistance to turning the rudder of a persistent person because theres some cost to changing direction.4 the obstinate do sometimes succeed in solving hard problems. one way is through luck like the stopped clock thats right twice a day they seize onto some arbitrary idea and it turns out to be right. another is when their obstinacy cancels out some other form of error. for example if a leader has overcautious subordinates their estimates of the probability of success will always be off in the same direction. so if he mindlessly says push ahead regardless in every borderline case hell usually turn out to be right.5 if you stop there at just energy and imagination you get the conventional caricature of an artist or poet.6 start by erring on the small side. if youre inexperienced youll inevitably err on one side or the other and if you err on the side of making the goal too broad you wont get anywhere. whereas if you err on the small side youll at least be moving forward. then once youre moving you expand the goal.

this is a talk i gave at an event called opt412 in pittsburgh. much of it will apply to other towns. but not all because as i say in the talk pittsburgh has some important advantages over most wouldbe startup hubs.what would it take to make pittsburgh into a startup hub like silicon valley i understand pittsburgh pretty well because i grew up here in monroeville. and i understand silicon valley pretty well because thats where i live now. could you get that kind of startup ecosystem going herewhen i agreed to speak here i didnt think id be able to give a very optimistic talk. i thought id be talking about what pittsburgh could do to become a startup hub very much in the subjunctive. instead im going to talk about what pittsburgh can do.what changed my mind was an article i read in of all places the new york times food section. the title was pittsburghs youthdriven food boom. to most people that might not even sound interesting let alone something related to startups. but it was electrifying to me to read that title. i dont think i could pick a more promising one if i tried. and when i read the article i got even more excited. it said people ages 25 to 29 now make up 7.6 percent of all residents up from 7 percent about a decade ago. wow i thought pittsburgh could be the next portland. it could become the cool place all the people in their twenties want to go live.when i got here a couple days ago i could feel the difference. i lived here from 1968 to 1984. i didnt realize it at the time but during that whole period the city was in free fall. on top of the flight to the suburbs that happened everywhere the steel and nuclear businesses were both dying. boy are things different now. its not just that downtown seems a lot more prosperous. there is an energy here that was not here when i was a kid.when i was a kid this was a place young people left. now its a place that attracts them.what does that have to do with startups startups are made of people and the average age of the people in a typical startup is right in that 25 to 29 bracket.ive seen how powerful it is for a city to have those people. five years ago they shifted the center of gravity of silicon valley from the peninsula to san francisco. google and facebook are on the peninsula but the next generation of big winners are all in sf. the reason the center of gravity shifted was the talent war for programmers especially. most 25 to 29 year olds want to live in the city not down in the boring suburbs. so whether they like it or not founders know they have to be in the city. i know multiple founders who would have preferred to live down in the valley proper but who made themselves move to sf because they knew otherwise theyd lose the talent war.so being a magnet for people in their twenties is a very promising thing to be. its hard to imagine a place becoming a startup hub without also being that. when i read that statistic about the increasing percentage of 25 to 29 year olds i had exactly the same feeling of excitement i get when i see a startups graphs start to creep upward off the x axis.nationally the percentage of 25 to 29 year olds is 6.8. that means youre .8 ahead. the population is 306000 so were talking about a surplus of about 2500 people. thats the population of a small town and thats just the surplus. so you have a toehold. now you just have to expand it.and though youthdriven food boom may sound frivolous it is anything but. restaurants and cafes are a big part of the personality of a city. imagine walking down a street in paris. what are you walking past little restaurants and cafes. imagine driving through some depressing random exurb. what are you driving past starbucks and mcdonalds and pizza hut. as gertrude stein said there is no there there. you could be anywhere.these independent restaurants and cafes are not just feeding people. theyre making there be a there here.so here is my first concrete recommendation for turning pittsburgh into the next silicon valley do everything you can to encourage this youthdriven food boom. what could the city do treat the people starting these little restaurants and cafes as your users and go ask them what they want. i can guess at least one thing they might want a fast permit process. san francisco has left you a huge amount of room to beat them in that department.i know restaurants arent the prime mover though. the prime mover as the times article said is cheap housing. thats a big advantage. but that phrase cheap housing is a bit misleading. there are plenty of places that are cheaper. whats special about pittsburgh is not that its cheap but that its a cheap place youd actually want to live.part of that is the buildings themselves. i realized a long time ago back when i was a poor twentysomething myself that the best deals were places that had once been rich and then became poor. if a place has always been rich its nice but too expensive. if a place has always been poor its cheap but grim. but if a place was once rich and then got poor you can find palaces for cheap. and thats whats bringing people here. when pittsburgh was rich a hundred years ago the people who lived here built big solid buildings. not always in the best taste but definitely solid. so here is another piece of advice for becoming a startup hub dont destroy the buildings that are bringing people here. when cities are on the way back up like pittsburgh is now developers race to tear down the old buildings. dont let that happen. focus on historic preservation. big real estate development projects are not whats bringing the twentysomethings here. theyre the opposite of the new restaurants and cafes they subtract personality from the city.the empirical evidence suggests you cannot be too strict about historic preservation. the tougher cities are about it the better they seem to do.but the appeal of pittsburgh is not just the buildings themselves. its the neighborhoods theyre in. like san francisco and new york pittsburgh is fortunate in being a precar city. its not too spread out. because those 25 to 29 year olds do not like driving. they prefer walking or bicycling or taking public transport. if youve been to san francisco recently you cant help noticing the huge number of bicyclists. and this is not just a fad that the twentysomethings have adopted. in this respect they have discovered a better way to live. the beards will go but not the bikes. cities where you can get around without driving are just better period. so i would suggest you do everything you can to capitalize on this. as with historic preservation it seems impossible to go too far.why not make pittsburgh the most bicycle and pedestrian friendly city in the country see if you can go so far that you make san francisco seem backward by comparison. if you do its very unlikely youll regret it. the city will seem like a paradise to the young people you want to attract. if they do leave to get jobs elsewhere it will be with regret at leaving behind such a place. and whats the downside can you imagine a headline city ruined by becoming too bicyclefriendly it just doesnt happen.so suppose cool old neighborhoods and cool little restaurants make this the next portland. will that be enough it will put you in a way better position than portland itself because pittsburgh has something portland lacks a firstrate research university. cmu plus little cafes means you have more than hipsters drinking lattes. it means you have hipsters drinking lattes while talking about distributed systems. now youre getting really close to san francisco.in fact youre better off than san francisco in one way because cmu is downtown but stanford and berkeley are out in the suburbs.what can cmu do to help pittsburgh become a startup hub be an even better research university. cmu is one of the best universities in the world but imagine what things would be like if it were the very best and everyone knew it. there are a lot of ambitious people who must go to the best place wherever it is. if cmu were it they would all come here. there would be kids in kazakhstan dreaming of one day living in pittsburgh.being that kind of talent magnet is the most important contribution universities can make toward making their city a startup hub. in fact it is practically the only contribution they can make.but wait shouldnt universities be setting up programs with words like innovation and entrepreneurship in their names no they should not. these kind of things almost always turn out to be disappointments. theyre pursuing the wrong targets. the way to get innovation is not to aim for innovation but to aim for something more specific like better batteries or better 3d printing. and the way to learn about entrepreneurship is to do it which you cant in school.i know it may disappoint some administrators to hear that the best thing a university can do to encourage startups is to be a great university. its like telling people who want to lose weight that the way to do it is to eat less.but if you want to know where startups come from look at the empirical evidence. look at the histories of the most successful startups and youll find they grow organically out of a couple of founders building something that starts as an interesting side project. universities are great at bringing together founders but beyond that the best thing they can do is get out of the way. for example by not claiming ownership of intellectual property that students and faculty develop and by having liberal rules about deferred admission and leaves of absence.in fact one of the most effective things a university could do to encourage startups is an elaborate form of getting out of the way invented by harvard. harvard used to have exams for the fall semester after christmas. at the beginning of january they had something called reading period when you were supposed to be studying for exams. and microsoft and facebook have something in common that few people realize they were both started during reading period. its the perfect situation for producing the sort of side projects that turn into startups. the students are all on campus but they dont have to do anything because theyre supposed to be studying for exams.harvard may have closed this window because a few years ago they moved exams before christmas and shortened reading period from 11 days to 7. but if a university really wanted to help its students start startups the empirical evidence weighted by market cap suggests the best thing they can do is literally nothing.the culture of pittsburgh is another of its strengths. it seems like a city has to be socially liberal to be a startup hub and its pretty clear why. a city has to tolerate strangeness to be a home for startups because startups are so strange. and you cant choose to allow just the forms of strangeness that will turn into big startups because theyre all intermingled. you have to tolerate all strangeness.that immediately rules out big chunks of the us. im optimistic it doesnt rule out pittsburgh. one of the things i remember from growing up here though i didnt realize at the time that there was anything unusual about it is how well people got along. im still not sure why. maybe one reason was that everyone felt like an immigrant. when i was a kid in monroeville people didnt call themselves american. they called themselves italian or serbian or ukranian. just imagine what it must have been like here a hundred years ago when people were pouring in from twenty different countries. tolerance was the only option.what i remember about the culture of pittsburgh is that it was both tolerant and pragmatic. thats how id describe the culture of silicon valley too. and its not a coincidence because pittsburgh was the silicon valley of its time. this was a city where people built new things. and while the things people build have changed the spirit you need to do that kind of work is the same.so although an influx of latteswilling hipsters may be annoying in some ways i would go out of my way to encourage them. and more generally to tolerate strangeness even unto the degree wacko californians do. for pittsburgh that is a conservative choice its a return to the citys roots.unfortunately i saved the toughest part for last. there is one more thing you need to be a startup hub and pittsburgh hasnt got it investors. silicon valley has a big investor community because its had 50 years to grow one. new york has a big investor community because its full of people who like money a lot and are quick to notice new ways to get it. but pittsburgh has neither of these. and the cheap housing that draws other people here has no effect on investors.if an investor community grows up here it will happen the same way it did in silicon valley slowly and organically. so i would not bet on having a big investor community in the short term. but fortunately there are three trends that make that less necessary than it used to be. one is that startups are increasingly cheap to start so you just dont need as much outside money as you used to. the second is that thanks to things like kickstarter a startup can get to revenue faster. you can put something on kickstarter from anywhere. the third is programs like y combinator. a startup from anywhere in the world can go to yc for 3 months pick up funding and then return home if they want.my advice is to make pittsburgh a great place for startups and gradually more of them will stick. some of those will succeed some of their founders will become investors and still more startups will stick.this is not a fast path to becoming a startup hub. but it is at least a path which is something few other cities have. and its not as if you have to make painful sacrifices in the meantime. think about what ive suggested you should do. encourage local restaurants save old buildings take advantage of density make cmu the best promote tolerance. these are the things that make pittsburgh good to live in now. all im saying is that you should do even more of them.and thats an encouraging thought. if pittsburghs path to becoming a startup hub is to be even more itself then it has a good chance of succeeding. in fact it probably has the best chance of any city its size. it will take some effort and a lot of time but if any city can do it pittsburgh can.

many startups go through a point a few months before they die where although they have a significant amount of money in the bank theyre also losing a lot each month and revenue growth is either nonexistent or mediocre. the company has say 6 months of runway. or to put it more brutally 6 months before theyre out of business. they expect to avoid that by raising more from investors. 1that last sentence is the fatal one.there may be nothing founders are so prone to delude themselves about as how interested investors will be in giving them additional funding. its hard to convince investors the first time too but founders expect that. what bites them the second time is a confluence of three forcesthe company is spending more now than it did the first time it raised money.investors have much higher standards for companies that have already raised money.the company is now starting to read as a failure. the first time it raised money it was neither a success nor a failure it was too early to ask. now its possible to ask that question and the default answer is failure because at this point that is the default outcome.im going to call the situation i described in the first paragraph the fatal pinch. i try to resist coining phrases but making up a name for this situation may snap founders into realizing when theyre in it.one of the things that makes the fatal pinch so dangerous is that its selfreinforcing. founders overestimate their chances of raising more money and so are slack about reaching profitability which further decreases their chances of raising money.now that you know about the fatal pinch how do you avoid it y combinator tells founders who raise money to act as if its the last theyll ever get. because the selfreinforcing nature of this situation works the other way too the less you need further investment the easier it is to get.what do you do if youre already in the fatal pinch the first step is to reevaluate the probability of raising more money. i will now by an amazing feat of clairvoyance do this for you the probability is zero. 2three options remain you can shut down the company you can increase how much you make and you can decrease how much you spend.you should shut down the company if youre certain it will fail no matter what you do. then at least you can give back the money you have left and save yourself however many months you would have spent riding it down.companies rarely have to fail though. what im really doing here is giving you the option of admitting youve already given up.if you dont want to shut down the company that leaves increasing revenues and decreasing expenses. in most startups expenses  people and decreasing expenses  firing people. 3 deciding to fire people is usually hard but theres one case in which it shouldnt be when there are people you already know you should fire but youre in denial about it. if so nows the time.if that makes you profitable or will enable you to make it to profitability on the money you have left youve avoided the immediate danger.otherwise you have three options you either have to fire good people get some or all of the employees to take less salary for a while or increase revenues.getting people to take less salary is a weak solution that will only work when the problem isnt too bad. if your current trajectory wont quite get you to profitability but you can get over the threshold by cutting salaries a little you might be able to make the case to everyone for doing it. otherwise youre probably just postponing the problem and that will be obvious to the people whose salaries youre proposing to cut. 4which leaves two options firing good people and making more money. while trying to balance them keep in mind the eventual goal to be a successful product company in the sense of having a single thing lots of people use.you should lean more toward firing people if the source of your trouble is overhiring. if you went out and hired 15 people before you even knew what you were building youve created a broken company. you need to figure out what youre building and it will probably be easier to do that with a handful of people than 15. plus those 15 people might not even be the ones you need for whatever you end up building. so the solution may be to shrink and then figure out what direction to grow in. after all youre not doing those 15 people any favors if you fly the company into ground with them aboard. theyll all lose their jobs eventually along with all the time they expended on this doomed company.whereas if you only have a handful of people it may be better to focus on trying to make more money. it may seem facile to suggest a startup make more money as if that could be done for the asking. usually a startup is already trying as hard as it can to sell whatever it sells. what im suggesting here is not so much to try harder to make money but to try to make money in a different way. for example if you have only one person selling while the rest are writing code consider having everyone work on selling. what good will more code do you when youre out of business if you have to write code to close a certain deal go ahead that follows from everyone working on selling. but only work on whatever will get you the most revenue the soonest.another way to make money differently is to sell different things and in particular to do more consultingish work. i say consultingish because there is a long slippery slope from making products to pure consulting and you dont have to go far down it before you start to offer something really attractive to customers. although your product may not be very appealing yet if youre a startup your programmers will often be way better than the ones your customers have. or you may have expertise in some new field they dont understand. so if you change your sales conversations just a little from do you want to buy our product to what do you need that youd pay a lot for you may find its suddenly a lot easier to extract money from customers.be ruthlessly mercenary when you start doing this though. youre trying to save your company from death here so make customers pay a lot quickly. and to the extent you can try to avoid the worst pitfalls of consulting. the ideal thing might be if you built a precisely defined derivative version of your product for the customer and it was otherwise a straight product sale. you keep the ip and no billing by the hour.in the best case this consultingish work may not be just something you do to survive but may turn out to be the thingthatdoesntscale that defines your company. dont expect it to be but as you dive into individual users needs keep your eyes open for narrow openings that have wide vistas beyond.there is usually so much demand for custom work that unless youre really incompetent there has to be some point down the slope of consulting at which you can survive. but i didnt use the term slippery slope by accident customers insatiable demand for custom work will always be pushing you toward the bottom. so while youll probably survive the problem now becomes to survive with the least damage and distraction.the good news is plenty of successful startups have passed through neardeath experiences and gone on to flourish. you just have to realize in time that youre near death. and if youre in the fatal pinch you are.notes1 there are a handful of companies that cant reasonably expect to make money for the first year or two because what theyre building takes so long. for these companies substitute progress for revenue growth. youre not one of these companies unless your initial investors agreed in advance that you were. and frankly even these companies wish they werent because the illiquidity of progress puts them at the mercy of investors.2 theres a variant of the fatal pinch where your existing investors help you along by promising to invest more. or rather where you read them as promising to invest more while they think theyre just mentioning the possibility. the way to solve this problem if you have 8 months of runway or less is to try to get the money right now. then youll either get the money in which case immediate problem solved or at least prevent your investors from helping you to remain in denial about your fundraising prospects.3 obviously if you have significant expenses other than salaries that you can eliminate do it now.4 unless of course the source of the problem is that youre paying yourselves high salaries. if by cutting the founders salaries to the minimum you need you can make it to profitability you should. but its a bad sign if you needed to read this to realize that.

people who are powerful but uncharismatic will tend to be disliked. their power makes them a target for criticism that they dont have the charisma to disarm. that was hillary clintons problem. it also tends to be a problem for any ceo who is more of a builder than a schmoozer. and yet the buildertype ceo is like hillary probably the best person for the job.i dont think there is any solution to this problem. its human nature. the best we can do is to recognize that its happening and to understand that being a magnet for criticism is sometimes a sign not that someone is the wrong person for a job but that theyre the right one.

at this years startup school david heinemeier hansson gave a talk in which he suggested that startup founders should do things the old fashioned way. instead of hoping to get rich by building a valuable company and then selling stock in a liquidity event founders should start companies that make money and live off the revenues.sounds like a good plan. lets think about the optimal way to do this.one disadvantage of living off the revenues of your company is that you have to keep running it. and as anyone who runs their own business can tell you that requires your complete attention. you cant just start a business and check out once things are going well or they stop going well surprisingly fast.the main economic motives of startup founders seem to be freedom and security. they want enough money that a they dont have to worry about running out of money and b they can spend their time how they want. running your own business offers neither. you certainly dont have freedom no boss is so demanding. nor do you have security because if you stop paying attention to the company its revenues go away and with them your income.the best case for most people would be if you could hire someone to manage the company for you once youd grown it to a certain size. suppose you could find a really good manager. then you would have both freedom and security. you could pay as little attention to the business as you wanted knowing that your manager would keep things running smoothly. and that being so revenues would continue to flow in so youd have security as well.there will of course be some founders who wouldnt like that idea the ones who like running their company so much that theres nothing else theyd rather do. but this group must be small. the way you succeed in most businesses is to be fanatically attentive to customers needs. what are the odds that your own desires would coincide exactly with the demands of this powerful external forcesure running your own company can be fairly interesting. viaweb was more interesting than any job id had before. and since i made much more money from it it offered the highest ratio of income to boringness of anything id done by orders of magnitude. but was it the most interesting work i could imagine doing no.whether the number of founders in the same position is asymptotic or merely large there are certainly a lot of them. for them the right approach would be to hand the company over to a professional manager eventually if they could find one who was good enough.so far so good. but what if your manager was hit by a bus what you really want is a management company to run your company for you. then you dont depend on any one person.if you own rental property there are companies you can hire to manage it for you. some will do everything from finding tenants to fixing leaks. of course running companies is a lot more complicated than managing rental property but lets suppose there were management companies that could do it for you. theyd charge a lot but wouldnt it be worth it id sacrifice a large percentage of the income for the extra peace of mind.i realize what im describing already sounds too good to be true but i can think of a way to make it even more attractive. if company management companies existed there would be an additional service they could offer clients they could let them insure their returns by pooling their risk. after all even a perfect manager cant save a company when as sometimes happens its whole market dies just as property managers cant save you from the building burning down. but a company that managed a large enough number of companies could say to all its clients well combine the revenues from all your companies and pay you your proportionate share.if such management companies existed theyd offer the maximum of freedom and security. someone would run your company for you and youd be protected even if it happened to die.lets think about how such a management company might be organized. the simplest way would be to have a new kind of stock representing the total pool of companies they were managing. when you signed up youd trade your companys stock for shares of this pool in proportion to an estimate of your companys value that youd both agreed upon. then youd automatically get your share of the returns of the whole pool.the catch is that because this kind of trade would be hard to undo you couldnt switch management companies. but theres a way they could fix that suppose all the company management companies got together and agreed to allow their clients to exchange shares in all their pools. then you could in effect simultaneously choose all the management companies to run yours for you in whatever proportion you wanted and change your mind later as often as you wanted.if such pooledrisk company management companies existed signing up with one would seem the ideal plan for most people following the route david advocated.good news they do exist. what ive just described is an acquisition by a public company.unfortunately though public acquirers are structurally identical to pooledrisk company management companies they dont think of themselves that way. with a property management company you can just walk in whenever you want and say manage my rental property for me and theyll do it. whereas acquirers are as of this writing extremely fickle. sometimes theyre in a buying mood and theyll overpay enormously other times theyre not interested. theyre like property management companies run by madmen. or more precisely by benjamin grahams mr. market.so while on average public acquirers behave like pooledrisk company managers you need a window of several years to get average case performance. if you wait long enough five years say youre likely to hit an up cycle where some acquirer is hot to buy you. but you cant choose when it happens.you cant assume investors will carry you for as long as you might have to wait. your company has to make money. opinions are divided about how early to focus on that. joe kraus says you should try charging customers right away. and yet some of the most successful startups including google ignored revenue at first and concentrated exclusively on development. the answer probably depends on the type of company youre starting. i can imagine some where trying to make sales would be a good heuristic for product design and others where it would just be a distraction. the test is probably whether it helps you to understand your users.you can choose whichever revenue strategy you think is best for the type of company youre starting so long as youre profitable. being profitable ensures youll get at least the average of the acquisition marketin which public companies do behave as pooledrisk company management companies.david isnt mistaken in saying you should start a company to live off its revenues. the mistake is thinking this is somehow opposed to starting a company and selling it. in fact for most people the latter is merely the optimal case of the former.

as a child i read a book of stories about a famous judge in eighteenth century japan called ooka tadasuke. one of the cases he decided was brought by the owner of a food shop. a poor student who could afford only rice was eating his rice while enjoying the delicious cooking smells coming from the food shop. the owner wanted the student to pay for the smells he was enjoying.the student was stealing his smellsthis story often comes to mind when i hear the riaa and mpaa accusing people of stealing music and movies.it sounds ridiculous to us to treat smells as property. but i can imagine scenarios in which one could charge for smells. imagine we were living on a moon base where we had to buy air by the liter. i could imagine air suppliers adding scents at an extra charge.the reason it seems ridiculous to us to treat smells as property is that it wouldnt work to. it would work on a moon base though.what counts as property depends on what works to treat as property. and that not only can change but has changed. humans may always for some definition of human and always have treated small items carried on ones person as property. but hunter gatherers didnt treat land for example as property in the way we do. 1the reason so many people think of property as having a single unchanging definition is that its definition changes very slowly. 2 but we are in the midst of such a change now. the record labels and movie studios used to distribute what they made like air shipped through tubes on a moon base. but with the arrival of networks its as if weve moved to a planet with a breathable atmosphere. data moves like smells now. and through a combination of wishful thinking and shortterm greed the labels and studios have put themselves in the position of the food shop owner accusing us all of stealing their smells.the reason i say shortterm greed is that the underlying problem with the labels and studios is that the people who run them are driven by bonuses rather than equity. if they were driven by equity theyd be looking for ways to take advantage of technological change instead of fighting it. but building new things takes too long. their bonuses depend on this years revenues and the best way to increase those is to extract more money from stuff they do already.so what does this mean should people not be able to charge for content theres not a single yes or no answer to that question. people should be able to charge for content when it works to charge for content.but by works i mean something more subtle than when they can get away with it. i mean when people can charge for content without warping society in order to do it. after all the companies selling smells on the moon base could continue to sell them on the earth if they lobbied successfully for laws requiring us all to continue to breathe through tubes down here too even though we no longer needed to.the crazy legal measures that the labels and studios have been taking have a lot of that flavor. newspapers and magazines are just as screwed but they are at least declining gracefully. the riaa and mpaa would make us breathe through tubes if they could.ultimately it comes down to common sense. when youre abusing the legal system by trying to use mass lawsuits against randomly chosen people as a form of exemplary punishment or lobbying for laws that would break the internet if they passed thats ipso facto evidence youre using a definition of property that doesnt work.this is where its helpful to have working democracies and multiple sovereign countries. if the world had a single autocratic government the labels and studios could buy laws making the definition of property be whatever they wanted. but fortunately there are still some countries that are not copyright colonies of the us and even in the us politicians still seem to be afraid of actual voters in sufficient numbers. 3the people running the us may not like it when voters or other countries refuse to bend to their will but ultimately its in all our interest that theres not a single point of attack for people trying to warp the law to serve their own purposes. private property is an extremely useful idea  arguably one of our greatest inventions. so far each new definition of it has brought us increasing material wealth. 4 it seems reasonable to suppose the newest one will too. it would be a disaster if we all had to keep running an obsolete version just because a few powerful people were too lazy to upgrade.notes1 if you want to learn more about hunter gatherers i strongly recommend elizabeth marshall thomass the harmless people and the old way.2 change in the definition of property is driven mostly by technological progress however and since technological progress is accelerating so presumably will the rate of change in the definition of property. which means its all the more important for societies to be able to respond gracefully to such changes because they will come at an ever increasing rate.3 as far as i know the term copyright colony was first used by myles peterson.4 the state of technology isnt simply a function of the definition of property. they each constrain the other. but that being so you cant mess with the definition of property without affecting and probably harming the state of technology. the history of the ussr offers a vivid illustration of that.

publishers of all types from news to music are unhappy that consumers wont pay for content anymore. at least thats how they see it.in fact consumers never really were paying for content and publishers werent really selling it either. if the content was what they were selling why has the price of books or music or movies always depended mostly on the format why didnt better content cost more 1a copy of time costs 5 for 58 pages or 8.6 cents a page. the economist costs 7 for 86 pages or 8.1 cents a page. better journalism is actually slightly cheaper.almost every form of publishing has been organized as if the medium was what they were selling and the content was irrelevant. book publishers for example set prices based on the cost of producing and distributing books. they treat the words printed in the book the same way a textile manufacturer treats the patterns printed on its fabrics.economically the print media are in the business of marking up paper. we can all imagine an oldstyle editor getting a scoop and saying this will sell a lot of papers cross out that final s and youre describing their business model. the reason they make less money now is that people dont need as much paper.a few months ago i ran into a friend in a cafe. i had a copy of the new york times which i still occasionally buy on weekends. as i was leaving i offered it to him as ive done countless times before in the same situation. but this time something new happened. i felt that sheepish feeling you get when you offer someone something worthless. do you er want a printout of yesterdays news i asked. he didnt.now that the medium is evaporating publishers have nothing left to sell. some seem to think theyre going to sell contentthat they were always in the content business really. but they werent and its unclear whether anyone could be.sellingthere have always been people in the business of selling information but that has historically been a distinct business from publishing. and the business of selling information to consumers has always been a marginal one. when i was a kid there were people who used to sell newsletters containing stock tips printed on colored paper that made them hard for the copiers of the day to reproduce. that is a different world both culturally and economically from the one publishers currently inhabit.people will pay for information they think they can make money from. thats why they paid for those stock tip newsletters and why companies pay now for bloomberg terminals and economist intelligence unit reports. but will people pay for information otherwise history offers little encouragement.if audiences were willing to pay more for better content why wasnt anyone already selling it to them there was no reason you couldnt have done that in the era of physical media. so were the print media and the music labels simply overlooking this opportunity or is it rather nonexistentwhat about itunes doesnt that show people will pay for content well not really. itunes is more of a tollbooth than a store. apple controls the default path onto the ipod. they offer a convenient list of songs and whenever you choose one they ding your credit card for a small amount just below the threshold of attention. basically itunes makes money by taxing people not selling them stuff. you can only do that if you own the channel and even then you dont make much from it because a toll has to be ignorable to work. once a toll becomes painful people start to find ways around it and thats pretty easy with digital content.the situation is much the same with digital books. whoever controls the device sets the terms. its in their interest for content to be as cheap as possible and since they own the channel theres a lot they can do to drive prices down. prices will fall even further once writers realize they dont need publishers. getting a book printed and distributed is a daunting prospect for a writer but most can upload a file.is software a counterexample people pay a lot for desktop software and thats just information. true but i dont think publishers can learn much from software. software companies can charge a lot because a many of the customers are businesses who get in trouble if they use pirated versions and b though in form merely information software is treated by both maker and purchaser as a different type of thing from a song or an article. a photoshop user needs photoshop in a way that no one needs a particular song or article.thats why theres a separate word content for information thats not software. software is a different business. software and content blur together in some of the most lightweight software like casual games. but those are usually free. to make money the way software companies do publishers would have to become software companies and being publishers gives them no particular head start in that domain. 2the most promising countertrend is the premium cable channel. people still pay for those. but broadcasting isnt publishing youre not selling a copy of something. thats one reason the movie business hasnt seen their revenues decline the way the news and music businesses have. they only have one foot in publishing.to the extent the movie business can avoid becoming publishers they may avoid publishings problems. but there are limits to how well theyll be able to do that. once publishinggiving people copiesbecomes the most natural way of distributing your content it probably doesnt work to stick to old forms of distribution just because you make more that way. if free copies of your content are available online then youre competing with publishings form of distribution and thats just as bad as being a publisher.apparently some people in the music business hope to retroactively convert it away from publishing by getting listeners to pay for subscriptions. it seems unlikely that will work if theyre just streaming the same files you can get as mp3s.nextwhat happens to publishing if you cant sell content you have two choices give it away and make money from it indirectly or find ways to embody it in things people will pay for.the first is probably the future of most current media. give music away and make money from concerts and tshirts. publish articles for free and make money from one of a dozen permutations of advertising. both publishers and investors are down on advertising at the moment but it has more potential than they realize.im not claiming that potential will be realized by the existing players. the optimal ways to make money from the written word probably require different words written by different people.its harder to say what will happen to movies. they could evolve into ads. or they could return to their roots and make going to the theater a treat. if they made the experience good enough audiences might start to prefer it to watching pirated movies at home. 3 or maybe the movie business will dry up and the people working in it will go to work for game developers.i dont know how big embodying information in physical form will be. it may be surprisingly large people overvalue physical stuff. there should remain some market for printed books at least.i can see the evolution of book publishing in the books on my shelves. clearly at some point in the 1960s the big publishing houses started to ask how cheaply can we make books before people refuse to buy them the answer turned out to be one step short of phonebooks. as long as it isnt floppy consumers still perceive it as a book.that worked as long as buying printed books was the only way to read them. if printed books are optional publishers will have to work harder to entice people to buy them. there should be some market but its hard to foresee how big because its size will depend not on macro trends like the amount people read but on the ingenuity of individual publishers. 4some magazines may thrive by focusing on the magazine as a physical object. fashion magazines could be made lush in a way that would be hard to match digitally at least for a while. but this is probably not an option for most magazines.i dont know exactly what the future will look like but im not too worried about it. this sort of change tends to create as many good things as it kills. indeed the really interesting question is not what will happen to existing forms but what new forms will appear.the reason ive been writing about existing forms is that i dont know what new forms will appear. but though i cant predict specific winners i can offer a recipe for recognizing them. when you see something thats taking advantage of new technology to give people something they want that they couldnt have before youre probably looking at a winner. and when you see something thats merely reacting to new technology in an attempt to preserve some existing source of revenue youre probably looking at a loser.

now that the term ramen profitable has become widespread i ought to explain precisely what the idea entails.ramen profitable means a startup makes just enough to pay the founders living expenses. this is a different form of profitability than startups have traditionally aimed for. traditional profitability means a big bet is finally paying off whereas the main importance of ramen profitability is that it buys you time. 1in the past a startup would usually become profitable only after raising and spending quite a lot of money. a company making computer hardware might not become profitable for 5 years during which they spent 50 million. but when they did they might have revenues of 50 million a year. this kind of profitability means the startup has succeeded.ramen profitability is the other extreme a startup that becomes profitable after 2 months even though its revenues are only 3000 a month because the only employees are a couple 25 year old founders who can live on practically nothing. revenues of 3000 a month do not mean the company has succeeded. but it does share something with the one thats profitable in the traditional way they dont need to raise money to survive.ramen profitability is an unfamiliar idea to most people because it only recently became feasible. its still not feasible for a lot of startups it would not be for most biotech startups for example but it is for many software startups because theyre now so cheap. for many the only real cost is the founders living expenses.the main significance of this type of profitability is that youre no longer at the mercy of investors. if youre still losing money then eventually youll either have to raise more or shut down. once youre ramen profitable this painful choice goes away. you can still raise money but you dont have to do it now.  the most obvious advantage of not needing money is that you can get better terms. if investors know you need money theyll sometimes take advantage of you. some may even deliberately stall because they know that as you run out of money youll become increasingly pliable.but there are also three less obvious advantages of ramen profitability. one is that it makes you more attractive to investors. if youre already profitable on however small a scale it shows that a you can get at least someone to pay you b youre serious about building things people want and c youre disciplined enough to keep expenses low.this is reassuring to investors because youve addressed three of their biggest worries. its common for them to fund companies that have smart founders and a big market and yet still fail. when these companies fail its usually because a people wouldnt pay for what they made e.g. because it was too hard to sell to them or the market wasnt ready yet b the founders solved the wrong problem instead of paying attention to what users needed or c the company spent too much and burned through their funding before they started to make money. if youre ramen profitable youre already avoiding these mistakes.another advantage of ramen profitability is that its good for morale. a company tends to feel rather theoretical when you first start it. its legally a company but you feel like youre lying when you call it one. when people start to pay you significant amounts the company starts to feel real. and your own living expenses are the milestone you feel most because at that point the future flips state. now survival is the default instead of dying.a morale boost on that scale is very valuable in a startup because the moral weight of running a startup is what makes it hard. startups are still very rare. why dont more people do it the financial risk plenty of 25 year olds save nothing anyway. the long hours plenty of people work just as long hours in regular jobs. what keeps people from starting startups is the fear of having so much responsibility. and this is not an irrational fear it really is hard to bear. anything that takes some of that weight off you will greatly increase your chances of surviving.a startup that reaches ramen profitability may be more likely to succeed than not. which is pretty exciting considering the bimodal distribution of outcomes in startups you either fail or make a lot of money.the fourth advantage of ramen profitability is the least obvious but may be the most important. if you dont need to raise money you dont have to interrupt working on the company to do it.raising money is terribly distracting. youre lucky if your productivity is a third of what it was before. and it can last for months.i didnt understand or rather remember precisely why raising money was so distracting till earlier this year. id noticed that startups we funded would usually grind to a halt when they switched to raising money but i didnt remember exactly why till yc raised money itself. we had a comparatively easy time of it the first people i asked said yes but it took months to work out the details and during that time i got hardly any real work done. why because i thought about it all the time.at any given time there tends to be one problem thats the most urgent for a startup. this is what you think about as you fall asleep at night and when you take a shower in the morning. and when you start raising money that becomes the problem you think about. you only take one shower in the morning and if youre thinking about investors during it then youre not thinking about the product.whereas if you can choose when you raise money you can pick a time when youre not in the middle of something else and you can probably also insist that the round close fast. you may even be able to avoid having the round occupy your thoughts if you dont care whether it closes.  ramen profitable means no more than the definition implies. it does not for example imply that youre bootstrapping the startupthat youre never going to take money from investors. empirically that doesnt seem to work very well. few startups succeed without taking investment. maybe as startups get cheaper it will become more common. on the other hand the money is there waiting to be invested. if startups need it less theyll be able to get it on better terms which will make them more inclined to take it. that will tend to produce an equilibrium. 2another thing ramen profitability doesnt imply is joe krauss idea that you should put your business model in beta when you put your product in beta. he believes you should get people to pay you from the beginning. i think thats too constraining. facebook didnt and theyve done better than most startups. making money right away was not only unnecessary for them but probably would have been harmful. i do think joes rule could be useful for many startups though. when founders seem unfocused i sometimes suggest they try to get customers to pay them for something in the hope that this constraint will prod them into action.the difference between joes idea and ramen profitability is that a ramen profitable company doesnt have to be making money the way it ultimately will. it just has to be making money. the most famous example is google which initially made money by licensing search to sites like yahoo.is there a downside to ramen profitability probably the biggest danger is that it might turn you into a consulting firm. startups have to be product companies in the sense of making a single thing that everyone uses. the defining quality of startups is that they grow fast and consulting just cant scale the way a product can. 3 but its pretty easy to make 3000 a month consulting in fact that would be a low rate for contract programming. so there could be a temptation to slide into consulting and telling yourselves youre a ramen profitable startup when in fact youre not a startup at all.its ok to do a little consultingtype work at first. startups usually have to do something weird at first. but remember that ramen profitability is not the destination. a startups destination is to grow really big ramen profitability is a trick for not dying en route.notes1 the ramen in ramen profitable refers to instant ramen which is just about the cheapest food available.please do not take the term literally. living on instant ramen would be very unhealthy. rice and beans are a better source of food. start by investing in a rice cooker if you dont have one.rice and beans for 2n  olive oil or butter  n yellow onions  other fresh vegetables experiment  3n cloves garlic  n 12oz cans white kidney or black beans  n cubes knorr beef or vegetable bouillon  n teaspoons freshly ground black pepper  3n teaspoons ground cumin  n cups dry rice preferably brownput rice in rice cooker. add water as specified on rice package. default 2 cups water per cup of rice. turn on rice cooker and forget about it.chop onions and other vegetables and fry in oil over fairly low heat till onions are glassy. put in chopped garlic pepper cumin and a little more fat and stir. keep heat low. cook another 2 or 3 minutes then add beans dont drain the beans and stir. throw in the bouillon cubes cover and cook on lowish heat for at least 10 minutes more. stir vigilantly to avoid sticking.if you want to save money buy beans in giant cans from discount stores. spices are also much cheaper when bought in bulk. if theres an indian grocery store near you theyll have big bags of cumin for the same price as the little jars in supermarkets.2 theres a good chance that a shift in power from investors to founders would actually increase the size of the venture business. i think investors currently err too far on the side of being harsh to founders. if they were forced to stop the whole venture business would work better and you might see something like the increase in trade you always see when restrictive laws are removed.investors are one of the biggest sources of pain for founders if they stopped causing so much pain it would be better to be a founder and if it were better to be a founder more people would do it.3 its conceivable that a startup could grow big by transforming consulting into a form that would scale. but if they did that theyd really be a product company.

in the science fiction books i read as a kid reading had often been replaced by some more efficient way of acquiring knowledge. mysterious tapes would load it into ones brain like a program being loaded into a computer.that sort of thing is unlikely to happen anytime soon. not just because it would be hard to build a replacement for reading but because even if one existed it would be insufficient. reading about x doesnt just teach you about x it also teaches you how to write. 1would that matter if we replaced reading would anyone need to be good at writingthe reason it would matter is that writing is not just a way to convey ideas but also a way to have them.a good writer doesnt just think and then write down what he thought as a sort of transcript. a good writer will almost always discover new things in the process of writing. and there is as far as i know no substitute for this kind of discovery. talking about your ideas with other people is a good way to develop them. but even after doing this youll find you still discover new things when you sit down to write. there is a kind of thinking that can only be done by writing.there are of course kinds of thinking that can be done without writing. if you dont need to go too deeply into a problem you can solve it without writing. if youre thinking about how two pieces of machinery should fit together writing about it probably wont help much. and when a problem can be described formally you can sometimes solve it in your head. but if you need to solve a complicated illdefined problem it will almost always help to write about it. which in turn means that someone whos not good at writing will almost always be at a disadvantage in solving such problems.you cant think well without writing well and you cant write well without reading well. and i mean that last well in both senses. you have to be good at reading and read good things. 2people who just want information may find other ways to get it. but people who want to have ideas cant afford to.

when intellectuals talk about the death penalty they talk about things like whether its permissible for the state to take someones life whether the death penalty acts as a deterrent and whether more death sentences are given to some groups than others. but in practice the debate about the death penalty is not about whether its ok to kill murderers. its about whether its ok to kill innocent people because at least 4 of people on death row are innocent.when i was a kid i imagined that it was unusual for people to be convicted of crimes they hadnt committed and that in murder cases especially this must be very rare. far from it. now thanks to organizations like the innocence project we see a constant stream of stories about murder convictions being overturned after new evidence emerges. sometimes the police and prosecutors were just very sloppy. sometimes they were crooked and knew full well they were convicting an innocent person.kenneth adams and three other men spent 18 years in prison on a murder conviction. they were exonerated after dna testing implicated three different men two of whom later confessed. the police had been told about the other men early in the investigation but never followed up the lead.keith harward spent 33 years in prison on a murder conviction. he was convicted because experts said his teeth matched photos of bite marks on one victim. he was exonerated after dna testing showed the murder had been committed by another man jerry crotty.ricky jackson and two other men spent 39 years in prison after being convicted of murder on the testimony of a 12 year old boy who later recanted and said hed been coerced by police. multiple people have confirmed the boy was elsewhere at the time. the three men were exonerated after the county prosecutor dropped the charges saying the state is conceding the obvious.alfred brown spent 12 years in prison on a murder conviction including 10 years on death row. he was exonerated after it was discovered that the assistant district attorney had concealed phone records proving he could not have committed the crimes.glenn ford spent 29 years on death row after having been convicted of murder. he was exonerated after new evidence proved he was not even at the scene when the murder occurred. the attorneys assigned to represent him had never tried a jury case before.cameron willingham was actually executed in 2004 by lethal injection. the expert who testified that he deliberately set fire to his house has since been discredited. a reexamination of the case ordered by the state of texas in 2009 concluded that a finding of arson could not be sustained.rich glossip has spent 20 years on death row after being convicted of murder on the testimony of the actual killer who escaped with a life sentence in return for implicating him. in 2015 he came within minutes of execution before it emerged that oklahoma had been planning to kill him with an illegal combination of drugs. they still plan to go ahead with the execution perhaps as soon as this summer despite new evidence exonerating him.i could go on. there are hundreds of similar cases. in florida alone 29 death row prisoners have been exonerated so far.far from being rare wrongful murder convictions are very common. police are under pressure to solve a crime that has gotten a lot of attention. when they find a suspect they want to believe hes guilty and ignore or even destroy evidence suggesting otherwise. district attorneys want to be seen as effective and tough on crime and in order to win convictions are willing to manipulate witnesses and withhold evidence. courtappointed defense attorneys are overworked and often incompetent. theres a ready supply of criminals willing to give false testimony in return for a lighter sentence suggestible witnesses who can be made to say whatever police want and bogus experts eager to claim that science proves the defendant is guilty. and juries want to believe them since otherwise some terrible crime remains unsolved.this circus of incompetence and dishonesty is the real issue with the death penalty. we dont even reach the point where theoretical questions about the moral justification or effectiveness of capital punishment start to matter because so many of the people sentenced to death are actually innocent. whatever it means in theory in practice capital punishment means killing innocent people.

i wasnt sure what to talk about at startup school so i decided to ask the founders of the startups wed funded. what hadnt i written about yetim in the unusual position of being able to test the essays i write about startups. i hope the ones on other topics are right but i have no way to test them. the ones on startups get tested by about 70 people every 6 months.so i sent all the founders an email asking what surprised them about starting a startup. this amounts to asking what i got wrong because if id explained things well enough nothing should have surprised them.im proud to report i got one response sayingwhat surprised me the most is that everything was actually fairly predictablethe bad news is that i got over 100 other responses listing the surprises they encountered.there were very clear patterns in the responses it was remarkable how often several people had been surprised by exactly the same thing. these were the biggest1. be careful with cofoundersthis was the surprise mentioned by the most founders. there were two types of responses that you have to be careful who you pick as a cofounder and that you have to work hard to maintain your relationship.what people wished theyd paid more attention to when choosing cofounders was character and commitment not ability. this was particularly true with startups that failed. the lesson dont pick cofounders who will flake.heres a typical reponseyou havent seen someones true colors unless youve worked with them on a startup.the reason character is so important is that its tested more severely than in most other situations. one founder said explicitly that the relationship between founders was more important than abilityi would rather cofound a startup with a friend than a stranger with higher output. startups are so hard and emotional that the bonds and emotional and social support that come with friendship outweigh the extra output lost.we learned this lesson a long time ago. if you look at the yc application there are more questions about the commitment and relationship of the founders than their ability.founders of successful startups talked less about choosing cofounders and more about how hard they worked to maintain their relationship.one thing that surprised me is how the relationship of startup founders goes from a friendship to a marriage. my relationship with my cofounder went from just being friends to seeing each other all the time fretting over the finances and cleaning up shit. and the startup was our baby. i summed it up once like this its like were married but were not fucking.several people used that word married. its a far more intense relationship than you usually see between coworkerspartly because the stresses are so much greater and partly because at first the founders are the whole company. so this relationship has to be built of top quality materials and carefully maintained. its the basis of everything.2. startups take over your lifejust as the relationship between cofounders is more intense than it usually is between coworkers so is the relationship between the founders and the company. running a startup is not like having a job or being a student because it never stops. this is so foreign to most peoples experience that they dont get it till it happens. 1i didnt realize i would spend almost every waking moment either working or thinking about our startup. you enter a whole different way of life when its your company vs. working for someone elses company.its exacerbated by the fast pace of startups which makes it seem like time slows downi think the thing thats been most surprising to me is how ones perspective on time shifts. working on our startup i remember time seeming to stretch out so that a month was a huge interval.in the best case total immersion can be excitingits surprising how much you become consumed by your startup in that you think about it day and night but never once does it feel like work.though i have to say that quote is from someone we funded this summer. in a couple years he may not sound so chipper.3. its an emotional rollercoasterthis was another one lots of people were surprised about. the ups and downs were more extreme than they were prepared for.in a startup things seem great one moment and hopeless the next. and by next i mean a couple hours later.the emotional ups and downs were the biggest surprise for me. one day wed think of ourselves as the next google and dream of buying islands the next wed be pondering how to let our loved ones know of our utter failure and on and on.the hard part obviously is the lows. for a lot of founders that was the big surprisehow hard it is to keep everyone motivated during rough days or weeks i.e. how low the lows can be.after a while if you dont have significant success to cheer you up it wears you outyour most basic advice to founders is just dont die but the energy to keep a company going in lieu of unburdening success isnt free it is siphoned from the founders themselves.theres a limit to how much you can take. if you get to the point where you cant keep working anymore its not the end of the world. plenty of famous founders have had some failures along the way.4. it can be funthe good news is the highs are also very high. several founders said what surprised them most about doing a startup was how fun it wasi think youve left out just how fun it is to do a startup. i am more fulfilled in my work than pretty much any of my friends who did not start companies.what they like most is the freedomim surprised by how much better it feels to be working on something that is challenging and creative something i believe in as opposed to the hiredgun stuff i was doing before. i knew it would feel better whats surprising is how much better.frankly though if ive misled people here im not eager to fix that. id rather have everyone think starting a startup is grim and hard than have founders go into it expecting it to be fun and a few months later saying this is supposed to be fun are you kiddingthe truth is it wouldnt be fun for most people. a lot of what we try to do in the application process is to weed out the people who wouldnt like it both for our sake and theirs.the best way to put it might be that starting a startup is fun the way a survivalist training course would be fun if youre into that sort of thing. which is to say not at all if youre not.5. persistence is the keya lot of founders were surprised how important persistence was in startups. it was both a negative and a positive surprise they were surprised both by the degree of persistence requiredeveryone said how determined and resilient you must be but going through it made me realize that the determination required was still understated.and also by the degree to which persistence alone was able to dissolve obstaclesif you are persistent even problems that seem out of your control i.e. immigration seem to work themselves out.several founders mentioned specifically how much more important persistence was than intelligence.ive been surprised again and again by just how much more important persistence is than raw intelligence.this applies not just to intelligence but to ability in general and thats why so many people said character was more important in choosing cofounders.6. think longtermyou need persistence because everything takes longer than you expect. a lot of people were surprised by that.im continually surprised by how long everything can take. assuming your product doesnt experience the explosive growth that very few products do everything from development to dealmaking especially dealmaking seems to take 23x longer than i always imagine.one reason founders are surprised is that because they work fast they expect everyone else to. theres a shocking amount of shear stress at every point where a startup touches a more bureaucratic organization like a big company or a vc fund. thats why fundraising and the enterprise market kill and maim so many startups. 2but i think the reason most founders are surprised by how long it takes is that theyre overconfident. they think theyre going to be an instant success like youtube or facebook. you tell them only 1 out of 100 successful startups has a trajectory like that and they all think were going to be that 1.maybe theyll listen to one of the more successful foundersthe top thing i didnt understand before going into it is that persistence is the name of the game. for the vast majority of startups that become successful its going to be a really long journey at least 3 years and probably 5.there is a positive side to thinking longerterm. its not just that you have to resign yourself to everything taking longer than it should. if you work patiently its less stressful and you can do better workbecause were relaxed its so much easier to have fun doing what we do. gone is the awkward nervous energy fueled by the desperate need to not fail guiding our actions. we can concentrate on doing whats best for our company product employees and customers.thats why things get so much better when you hit ramen profitability. you can shift into a different mode of working.7. lots of little thingswe often emphasize how rarely startups win simply because they hit on some magic idea. i think founders have now gotten that into their heads. but a lot were surprised to find this also applies within startups. you have to do lots of different thingsits much more of a grind than glamorous. a timeslice selected at random would more likely find me tracking down a weird dll loading bug on swedish windows or tracking down a bug in the financial model excel spreadsheet the night before a board meeting rather than having brilliant flashes of strategic insight.most hackerfounders would like to spend all their time programming. you wont get to unless you fail. which can be transformed into if you spend all your time programming you will fail.the principle extends even into programming. there is rarely a single brilliant hack that ensures successi learnt never to bet on any one feature or deal or anything to bring you success. it is never a single thing. everything is just incremental and you just have to keep doing lots of those things until you strike something.even in the rare cases where a clever hack makes your fortune you probably wont know till laterthere is no such thing as a killer feature. or at least you wont know what it is.so the best strategy is to try lots of different things. the reason not to put all your eggs in one basket is not the usual one which applies even when you know which basket is best. in a startup you dont even know that.8. start with something minimallots of founders mentioned how important it was to launch with the simplest possible thing. by this point everyone knows you should release fast and iterate. its practically a mantra at yc. but even so a lot of people seem to have been burned by not doing itbuild the absolute smallest thing that can be considered a complete application and ship it.why do people take too long on the first version pride mostly. they hate to release something that could be better. they worry what people will say about them. but you have to overcome thisdoing something simple at first glance does not mean you arent doing something meaningful defensible or valuable.dont worry what people will say. if your first version is so impressive that trolls dont make fun of it you waited too long to launch. 3one founder said this should be your approach to all programming not just startups and i tend to agree.now when coding i try to think how can i write this such that if people saw my code theyd be amazed at how little there is and how little it doesoverengineering is poison. its not like doing extra work for extra credit. its more like telling a lie that you then have to remember so you dont contradict it.9. engage usersproduct development is a conversation with the user that doesnt really start till you launch. before you launch youre like a police artist before hes shown the first version of his sketch to the witness.its so important to launch fast that it may be better to think of your initial version not as a product but as a trick for getting users to start talking to you.i learned to think about the initial stages of a startup as a giant experiment. all products should be considered experiments and those that have a market show promising results extremely quickly.once you start talking to users i guarantee youll be surprised by what they tell you.when you let customers tell you what theyre after they will often reveal amazing details about what they find valuable as well what theyre willing to pay for.the surprise is generally positive as well as negative. they wont like what youve built but there will be other things they would like that would be trivially easy to implement. its not till you start the conversation by launching the wrong thing that they can express or perhaps even realize what theyre looking for.10. change your ideato benefit from engaging with users you have to be willing to change your idea. weve always encouraged founders to see a startup idea as a hypothesis rather than a blueprint. and yet theyre still surprised how well it works to change the idea.normally if you complain about something being hard the general advice is to work harder. with a startup i think you should find a problem thats easy for you to solve. optimizing in solutionspace is familiar and straightforward but you can make enormous gains playing around in problemspace.whereas mere determination without flexibility is a greedy algorithm that may get you nothing more than a mediocre local maximumwhen someone is determined theres still a danger that theyll follow a long hard path that ultimately leads nowhere.you want to push forward but at the same time twist and turn to find the most promising path. one founder put it very succinctlyfast iteration is the key to success.one reason this advice is so hard to follow is that people dont realize how hard it is to judge startup ideas particularly their own. experienced founders learn to keep an open mindnow i dont laugh at ideas anymore because i realized how terrible i was at knowing if they were good or not.you can never tell what will work. you just have to do whatever seems best at each point. we do this with yc itself. we still dont know if it will work but it seems like a decent hypothesis.11. dont worry about competitorswhen you think youve got a great idea its sort of like having a guilty conscience about something. all someone has to do is look at you funny and you think oh my god they know.these alarms are almost always falsecompanies that seemed like competitors and threats at first glance usually never were when you really looked at it. even if they were operating in the same area they had a different goal.one reason people overreact to competitors is that they overvalue ideas. if ideas really were the key a competitor with the same idea would be a real threat. but its usually execution that mattersall the scares induced by seeing a new competitor pop up are forgotten weeks later. it always comes down to your own product and approach to the market.this is generally true even if competitors get lots of attention.competitors riding on lots of good blogger perception arent really the winners and can disappear from the map quickly. you need consumers after all.hype doesnt make satisfied users at least not for something as complicated as technology.12. its hard to get usersa lot of founders complained about how hard it was to get users though.i had no idea how much time and effort needed to go into attaining users.this is a complicated topic. when you cant get users its hard to say whether the problem is lack of exposure or whether the products simply bad. even good products can be blocked by switching or integration costsgetting people to use a new service is incredibly difficult. this is especially true for a service that other companies can use because it requires their developers to do work. if youre small they dont think it is urgent. 4the sharpest criticism of yc came from a founder who said we didnt focus enough on customer acquisitionyc preaches make something people want as an engineering task a never ending stream of feature after feature until enough people are happy and the application takes off. theres very little focus on the cost of customer acquisition.this may be true this may be something we need to fix especially for applications like games. if you make something where the challenges are mostly technical you can rely on word of mouth like google did. one founder was surprised by how well that worked for himthere is an irrational fear that no one will buy your product. but if you work hard and incrementally make it better there is no need to worry.but with other types of startups you may win less by features and more by deals and marketing.13. expect the worst with dealsdeals fall through. thats a constant of the startup world. startups are powerless and good startup ideas generally seem wrong. so everyone is nervous about closing deals with you and you have no way to make them.this is particularly true with investorsin retrospect it would have been much better if we had operated under the assumption that we would never get any additional outside investment. that would have focused us on finding revenue streams early.my advice is generally pessimistic. assume you wont get money and if someone does offer you any assume youll never get any more.if someone offers you money take it. you say it a lot but i think it needs even more emphasizing. we had the opportunity to raise a lot more money than we did last year and i wish we had.why do founders ignore me mostly because theyre optimistic by nature. the mistake is to be optimistic about things you cant control. by all means be optimistic about your ability to make something great. but youre asking for trouble if youre optimistic about big companies or investors.14. investors are cluelessa lot of founders mentioned how surprised they were by the cluelessness of investorsthey dont even know about the stuff theyve invested in. i met some investors that had invested in a hardware device and when i asked them to demo the device they had difficulty switching it on.angels are a bit better than vcs because they usually have startup experience themselvesvc investors dont know half the time what they are talking about and are years behind in their thinking. a few were great but 95 of the investors we dealt with were unprofessional didnt seem to be very good at business or have any kind of creative vision. angels were generally much better to talk to.why are founders surprised that vcs are clueless i think its because they seem so formidable.the reason vcs seem formidable is that its their profession to. you get to be a vc by convincing asset managers to trust you with hundreds of millions of dollars. how do you do that you have to seem confident and you have to seem like you understand technology. 515. you may have to play gamesbecause investors are so bad at judging you you have to work harder than you should at selling yourself. one founder said the thing that surprised him most wasthe degree to which feigning certitude impressed investors.this is the thing that has surprised me most about yc founders experiences. this summer we invited some of the alumni to talk to the new startups about fundraising and pretty much 100 of their advice was about investor psychology. i thought i was cynical about vcs but the founders were much more cynical.a lot of what startup founders do is just posturing. it works.vcs themselves have no idea of the extent to which the startups they like are the ones that are best at selling themselves to vcs. 6 its exactly the same phenomenon we saw a step earlier. vcs get money by seeming confident to lps and founders get money by seeming confident to vcs.16. luck is a big factorwith two such random linkages in the path between startups and money it shouldnt be surprising that luck is a big factor in deals. and yet a lot of founders are surprised by it.i didnt realize how much of a role luck plays and how much is outside of our control.if you think about famous startups its pretty clear how big a role luck plays. where would microsoft be if ibm insisted on an exclusive license for doswhy are founders fooled by this business guys probably arent but hackers are used to a world where skill is paramount and you get what you deserve.when we started our startup i had bought the hype of the startup founder dream that this is a game of skill. it is in some ways. having skill is valuable. so is being determined as all hell. but being lucky is the critical ingredient.actually the best model would be to say that the outcome is the product of skill determination and luck. no matter how much skill and determination you have if you roll a zero for luck the outcome is zero.these quotes about luck are not from founders whose startups failed. founders who fail quickly tend to blame themselves. founders who succeed quickly dont usually realize how lucky they were. its the ones in the middle who see how important luck is.17. the value of communitya surprising number of founders said what surprised them most about starting a startup was the value of community. some meant the microcommunity of yc foundersthe immense value of the peer group of yc companies and facing similar obstacles at similar times.which shouldnt be that surprising because thats why its structured that way. others were surprised at the value of the startup community in the larger sensehow advantageous it is to live in silicon valley where you cant help but hear all the cuttingedge tech and startup news and run into useful people constantly.the specific thing that surprised them most was the general spirit of benevolenceone of the most surprising things i saw was the willingness of people to help us. even people who had nothing to gain went out of their way to help our startup succeed.and particularly how it extended all the way to the topthe surprise for me was how accessible important and interesting people are. its amazing how easily you can reach out to people and get immediate feedback.this is one of the reasons i like being part of this world. creating wealth is not a zerosum game so you dont have to stab people in the back to win.18. you get no respectthere was one surprise founders mentioned that id forgotten about that outside the startup world startup founders get no respect.in social settings i found that i got a lot more respect when i said i worked on microsoft office instead of i work at a small startup youve never heard of called x.partly this is because the rest of the world just doesnt get startups and partly its yet another consequence of the fact that most good startup ideas seem badif you pitch your idea to a random person 95 of the time youll find the person instinctively thinks the idea will be a flop and youre wasting your time although they probably wont say this directly.unfortunately this extends even to datingit surprised me that being a startup founder does not get you more admiration from women.i did know about that but id forgotten.19. things change as you growthe last big surprise founders mentioned is how much things changed as they grew. the biggest change was that you got to program even lessyour job description as technical founderceo is completely rewritten every 612 months. less coding more managingplanningcompany building hiring cleaning up messes and generally getting things in place for what needs to happen a few months from now.in particular you now have to deal with employees who often have different motivationsi knew the founder equation and had been focused on it since i knew i wanted to start a startup as a 19 year old. the employee equation is quite different so it took me a while to get it down.fortunately it can become a lot less stressful once you reach cruising altitudeid say 75 of the stress is gone now from when we first started. running a business is so much more enjoyable now. were more confident. were more patient. we fight less. we sleep more.i wish i could say it was this way for every startup that succeeded but 75 is probably on the high side.the superpatternthere were a few other patterns but these were the biggest. ones first thought when looking at them all is to ask if theres a superpattern a pattern to the patterns.i saw it immediately and so did a yc founder i read the list to. these are supposed to be the surprises the things i didnt tell people. what do they all have in common theyre all things i tell people. if i wrote a new essay with the same outline as this that wasnt summarizing the founders responses everyone would say id run out of ideas and was just repeating myself.what is going on herewhen i look at the responses the common theme is that starting a startup was like i said but way more so. people just dont seem to get how different it is till they do it. why the key to that mystery is to ask how different from what once you phrase it that way the answer is obvious from a job. everyones model of work is a job. its completely pervasive. even if youve never had a job your parents probably did along with practically every other adult youve met.unconsciously everyone expects a startup to be like a job and that explains most of the surprises. it explains why people are surprised how carefully you have to choose cofounders and how hard you have to work to maintain your relationship. you dont have to do that with coworkers. it explains why the ups and downs are surprisingly extreme. in a job there is much more damping. but it also explains why the good times are surprisingly good most people cant imagine such freedom. as you go down the list almost all the surprises are surprising in how much a startup differs from a job.you probably cant overcome anything so pervasive as the model of work you grew up with. so the best solution is to be consciously aware of that. as you go into a startup youll be thinking everyone says its really extreme. your next thought will probably be but i cant believe it will be that bad. if you want to avoid being surprised the next thought after that should be and the reason i cant believe it will be that bad is that my model of work is a job.notes1 graduate students might understand it. in grad school you always feel you should be working on your thesis. it doesnt end every semester like classes do.2 the best way for a startup to engage with slowmoving organizations is to fork off separate processes to deal with them. its when theyre on the critical path that they kill youwhen you depend on closing a deal to move forward. its worth taking extreme measures to avoid that.3 this is a variant of reid hoffmans principle that if you arent embarrassed by what you launch with you waited too long to launch.4 the question to ask about what youve built is not whether its good but whether its good enough to supply the activation energy required.5 some vcs seem to understand technology because they actually do but thats overkill the defining test is whether you can talk about it well enough to convince limited partners.6 this is the same phenomenon you see with defense contractors or fashion brands. the dumber the customers the more effort you expend on the process of selling things to them rather than making the things you sell.

i met the reddits before we even started y combinator. in fact they were one of the reasons we started it.yc grew out of a talk i gave to the harvard computer society the undergrad computer club about how to start a startup. everyone else in the audience was probably local but steve and alexis came up on the train from the university of virginia where they were seniors. since theyd come so far i agreed to meet them for coffee. they told me about the startup idea wed later fund them to drop a way to order fast food on your cellphone.this was before smartphones. theyd have had to make deals with cell carriers and fast food chains just to get it launched. so it was not going to happen. it still doesnt exist 19 years later. but i was impressed with their brains and their energy. in fact i was so impressed with them and some of the other people i met at that talk that i decided to start something to fund them. a few days later i told steve and alexis that we were starting y combinator and encouraged them to apply.that first batch we didnt have any way to identify applicants so we made up nicknames for them. the reddits were the cell food muffins. muffin is a term of endearment jessica uses for things like small dogs and two year olds. so that gives you some idea what kind of impression steve and alexis made in those days. they had the look of slightly ruffled surprise that baby birds have.their idea was bad though. and since we thought then that we were funding ideas rather than founders we rejected them. but we felt bad about it. jessica was sad that wed rejected the muffins. and it seemed wrong to me to turn down the people wed been inspired to start yc to fund.i dont think the startup sense of the word pivot had been invented yet but we wanted to fund steve and alexis so if their idea was bad theyd have to work on something else. and i knew what else. in those days there was a site called delicious where you could save links. it had a page called del.icio.uspopular that listed the mostsaved links and people were using this page as a de facto reddit. i knew because a lot of the traffic to my site was coming from it. there needed to be something like del.icio.uspopular but designed for sharing links instead of being a byproduct of saving them.so i called steve and alexis and said that we liked them just not their idea so wed fund them if theyd work on something else. they were on the train home to virginia at that point. they got off at the next station and got on the next train north and by the end of the day were committed to working on whats now called reddit.they would have liked to call it snoo as in what snoo but snoo.com was too expensive so they settled for calling the mascot snoo and picked a name for the site that wasnt registered. early on reddit was just a provisional name or so they told me at least but its probably too late to change it now.as with all the really great startups theres an uncannily close match between the company and the founders. steve in particular. reddit has a certain personality  curious skeptical ready to be amused  and that personality is steves.steve will roll his eyes at this but hes an intellectual hes interested in ideas for their own sake. that was how he came to be in that audience in cambridge in the first place. he knew me because he was interested in a programming language ive written about called lisp and lisp is one of those languages few people learn except out of intellectual curiosity. steves kind of vacuumcleaner curiosity is exactly what you want when youre starting a site thats a list of links to literally anything interesting.steve was not a big fan of authority so he also liked the idea of a site without editors. in those days the top forum for programmers was a site called slashdot. it was a lot like reddit except the stories on the frontpage were chosen by human moderators. and though they did a good job that one small difference turned out to be a big difference. being driven by user submissions meant reddit was fresher than slashdot. news there was newer and users will always go where the newest news is.i pushed the reddits to launch fast. a version one didnt need to be more than a couple hundred lines of code. how could that take more than a week or two to build and they did launch comparatively fast about three weeks into the first yc batch. the first users were steve alexis me and some of their yc batchmates and college friends. it turns out you dont need that many users to collect a decent list of interesting links especially if you have multiple accounts per user.reddit got two more people from their yc batch chris slowe and aaron swartz and they too were unusually smart. chris was just finishing his phd in physics at harvard. aaron was younger a college freshman and even more antiauthority than steve. its not exaggerating to describe him as a martyr for what authority later did to him.slowly but inexorably reddits traffic grew. at first the numbers were so small they were hard to distinguish from background noise. but within a few weeks it was clear that there was a core of real users returning regularly to the site. and although all kinds of things have happened to reddit the company in the years since reddit the site never looked back.reddit the site and now app is such a fundamentally useful thing that its almost unkillable. which is why despite a long stretch after steve left when the management strategy ranged from benign neglect to spectacular blunders traffic just kept growing. you cant do that with most companies. most companies you take your eye off the ball for six months and youre in deep trouble. but reddit was special and when steve came back in 2015 i knew the world was in for a surprise.people thought they had reddits number one of the players in silicon valley but not one of the big ones. but those who knew what had been going on behind the scenes knew there was more to the story than this. if reddit could grow to the size it had with management that was harmless at best what could it do if steve came back we now know the answer to that question. or at least a lower bound on the answer. steve is not out of ideas yet.

a couple days ago i finally got being a good startup founder down to two words relentlessly resourceful.till then the best id managed was to get the opposite quality down to one hapless. most dictionaries say hapless means unlucky. but the dictionaries are not doing a very good job. a team that outplays its opponents but loses because of a bad decision by the referee could be called unlucky but not hapless. hapless implies passivity. to be hapless is to be battered by circumstances  to let the world have its way with you instead of having your way with the world. 1unfortunately theres no antonym of hapless which makes it difficult to tell founders what to aim for. dont be hapless is not much of a rallying cry.its not hard to express the quality were looking for in metaphors. the best is probably a running back. a good running back is not merely determined but flexible as well. they want to get downfield but they adapt their plans on the fly.unfortunately this is just a metaphor and not a useful one to most people outside the us. be like a running back is no better than dont be hapless.but finally ive figured out how to express this quality directly. i was writing a talk for investors and i had to explain what to look for in founders. what would someone who was the opposite of hapless be like theyd be relentlessly resourceful. not merely relentless. thats not enough to make things go your way except in a few mostly uninteresting domains. in any interesting domain the difficulties will be novel. which means you cant simply plow through them because you dont know initially how hard they are you dont know whether youre about to plow through a block of foam or granite. so you have to be resourceful. you have to keep trying new things.be relentlessly resourceful.that sounds right but is it simply a description of how to be successful in general i dont think so. this isnt the recipe for success in writing or painting for example. in that kind of work the recipe is more to be actively curious. resourceful implies the obstacles are external which they generally are in startups. but in writing and painting theyre mostly internal the obstacle is your own obtuseness. 2there probably are other fields where relentlessly resourceful is the recipe for success. but though other fields may share it i think this is the best short description well find of what makes a good startup founder. i doubt it could be made more precise.now that we know what were looking for that leads to other questions. for example can this quality be taught after four years of trying to teach it to people id say that yes surprisingly often it can. not to everyone but to many people. 3 some people are just constitutionally passive but others have a latent ability to be relentlessly resourceful that only needs to be brought out.this is particularly true of young people who have till now always been under the thumb of some kind of authority. being relentlessly resourceful is definitely not the recipe for success in big companies or in most schools. i dont even want to think what the recipe is in big companies but it is certainly longer and messier involving some combination of resourcefulness obedience and building alliances.identifying this quality also brings us closer to answering a question people often wonder about how many startups there could be. there is not as some people seem to think any economic upper bound on this number. theres no reason to believe there is any limit on the amount of newly created wealth consumers can absorb any more than there is a limit on the number of theorems that can be proven. so probably the limiting factor on the number of startups is the pool of potential founders. some people would make good founders and others wouldnt. and now that we can say what makes a good founder we know how to put an upper bound on the size of the pool.this test is also useful to individuals. if you want to know whether youre the right sort of person to start a startup ask yourself whether youre relentlessly resourceful. and if you want to know whether to recruit someone as a cofounder ask if they are.you can even use it tactically. if i were running a startup this would be the phrase id tape to the mirror. make something people want is the destination but be relentlessly resourceful is how you get there.notes1 i think the reason the dictionaries are wrong is that the meaning of the word has shifted. no one writing a dictionary from scratch today would say that hapless meant unlucky. but a couple hundred years ago they might have. people were more at the mercy of circumstances in the past and as a result a lot of the words we use for good and bad outcomes have origins in words about luck.when i was living in italy i was once trying to tell someone that i hadnt had much success in doing something but i couldnt think of the italian word for success. i spent some time trying to describe the word i meant. finally she said ah fortuna2 there are aspects of startups where the recipe is to be actively curious. there can be times when what youre doing is almost pure discovery. unfortunately these times are a small proportion of the whole. on the other hand they are in research too.3 id almost say to most people but i realize a i have no idea what most people are like and b im pathologically optimistic about peoples ability to change.

recently i realized id been holding two ideas in my head that would explode if combined.the first is that startups may represent a new economic phase on the scale of the industrial revolution. im not sure of this but there seems a decent chance its true. people are dramatically more productive as founders or early employees of startupsimagine how much less larry and sergey would have achieved if theyd gone to work for a big companyand that scale of improvement can change social customs.the second idea is that startups are a type of business that flourishes in certain places that specialize in itthat silicon valley specializes in startups in the same way los angeles specializes in movies or new york in finance. 1what if both are true what if startups are both a new economic phase and also a type of business that only flourishes in certain centersif so this revolution is going to be particularly revolutionary. all previous revolutions have spread. agriculture cities and industrialization all spread widely. if startups end up being like the movie business with just a handful of centers and one dominant one thats going to have novel consequences.there are already signs that startups may not spread particularly well. the spread of startups seems to be proceeding slower than the spread of the industrial revolution despite the fact that communication is so much faster now.within a few decades of the founding of boulton  watt there were steam engines scattered over northern europe and north america. industrialization didnt spread much beyond those regions for a while. it only spread to places where there was a strong middle classcountries where a private citizen could make a fortune without having it confiscated. otherwise it wasnt worth investing in factories. but in a country with a strong middle class it was easy for industrial techniques to take root. an individual mine or factory owner could decide to install a steam engine and within a few years he could probably find someone local to make him one. so steam engines spread fast. and they spread widely because the locations of mines and factories were determined by features like rivers harbors and sources of raw materials. 2startups dont seem to spread so well partly because theyre more a social than a technical phenomenon and partly because theyre not tied to geography. an individual european manufacturer could import industrial techniques and theyd work fine. this doesnt seem to work so well with startups you need a community of expertise as you do in the movie business. 3 plus there arent the same forces driving startups to spread. once railroads or electric power grids were invented every region had to have them. an area without railroads or power was a rich potential market. but this isnt true with startups. theres no need for a microsoft of france or google of germany.governments may decide they want to encourage startups locally but government policy cant call them into being the way a genuine need could.how will this all play out if i had to predict now id say that startups will spread but very slowly because their spread will be driven not by government policies which wont work or by market need which doesnt exist but to the extent that it happens at all by the same random factors that have caused startup culture to spread thus far. and such random factors will increasingly be outweighed by the pull of existing startup hubs.silicon valley is where it is because william shockley wanted to move back to palo alto where he grew up and the experts he lured west to work with him liked it so much they stayed. seattle owes much of its position as a tech center to the same cause gates and allen wanted to move home. otherwise albuquerque might have seattles place in the rankings. boston is a tech center because its the intellectual capital of the us and probably the world. and if battery ventures hadnt turned down facebook boston would be significantly bigger now on the startup radar screen.but of course its not a coincidence that facebook got funded in the valley and not boston. there are more and bolder investors in silicon valley than in boston and even undergrads know it.bostons case illustrates the difficulty youd have establishing a new startup hub this late in the game. if you wanted to create a startup hub by reproducing the way existing ones happened the way to do it would be to establish a firstrate research university in a place so nice that rich people wanted to live there. then the town would be hospitable to both groups you need both founders and investors. thats the combination that yielded silicon valley. but silicon valley didnt have silicon valley to compete with. if you tried now to create a startup hub by planting a great university in a nice place it would have a harder time getting started because many of the best startups it produced would be sucked away to existing startup hubs.recently i suggested a potential shortcut pay startups to move. once you had enough good startups in one place it would create a selfsustaining chain reaction. founders would start to move there without being paid because that was where their peers were and investors would appear too because that was where the deals were.in practice i doubt any government would have the balls to try this or the brains to do it right. i didnt mean it as a practical suggestion but more as an exploration of the lower bound of what it would take to create a startup hub deliberately.the most likely scenario is 1 that no government will successfully establish a startup hub and 2 that the spread of startup culture will thus be driven by the random factors that have driven it so far but 3 that these factors will be increasingly outweighed by the pull of existing startup hubs. result this revolution if it is one will be unusually localized.notes1 there are two very different types of startup one kind that evolves naturally and one kind thats called into being to commercialize a scientific discovery. most computersoftware startups are now the first type and most pharmaceutical startups the second. when i talk about startups in this essay i mean type i startups. there is no difficulty making type ii startups spread all you have to do is fund medical research labs commercializing whatever new discoveries the boffins throw off is as straightforward as building a new airport. type ii startups neither require nor produce startup culture. but that means having type ii startups wont get you type i startups. philadelphia is a case in point lots of type ii startups but hardly any type i.incidentally google may appear to be an instance of a type ii startup but it wasnt. google is not pagerank commercialized. they could have used another algorithm and everything would have turned out the same. what made google google is that they cared about doing search well at a critical point in the evolution of the web.2 watt didnt invent the steam engine. his critical invention was a refinement that made steam engines dramatically more efficient the separate condenser. but that oversimplifies his role. he had such a different attitude to the problem and approached it with such energy that he transformed the field. perhaps the most accurate way to put it would be to say that watt reinvented the steam engine.3 the biggest counterexample here is skype. if youre doing something that would get shut down in the us it becomes an advantage to be located elsewhere. thats why kazaa took the place of napster. and the expertise and connections the founders gained from running kazaa helped ensure the success of skype.

no one vc or angel has invested in more of the top startups than ron conway. he knows what happened in every deal in the valley half the time because he arranged it.and yet hes a super nice guy. in fact nice is not the word. ronco is good. i know of zero instances in which he has behaved badly. its hard even to imagine.when i first came to silicon valley i thought how lucky that someone so powerful is so benevolent. but gradually i realized it wasnt luck. it was by being benevolent that ronco became so powerful. all the deals he gets to invest in come to him through referrals. google did. facebook did. twitter was a referral from evan williams himself. and the reason so many people refer deals to him is that hes proven himself to be a good guy.good does not mean being a pushover. i would not want to face an angry ronco. but if rons angry at you its because you did something wrong. ron is so old school hes old testament. he will smite you in his just wrath but theres no malice in it.in almost every domain there are advantages to seeming good. it makes people trust you. but actually being good is an expensive way to seem good. to an amoral person it might seem to be overkill.in some fields it might be but apparently not in the startup world. though plenty of investors are jerks there is a clear trend among them the most successful investors are also the most upstanding. 1it was not always this way. i would not feel confident saying that about investors twenty years ago.what changed the startup world became more transparent and more unpredictable. both make it harder to seem good without actually being good.its obvious why transparency has that effect. when an investor maltreats a founder now it gets out. maybe not all the way to the press but other founders hear about it and that investor starts to lose deals. 2the effect of unpredictability is more subtle. it increases the work of being inconsistent. if youre going to be twofaced you have to know who you should be nice to and who you can get away with being nasty to. in the startup world things change so rapidly that you cant tell. the random college kid you talk to today might in a couple years be the ceo of the hottest startup in the valley. if you cant tell who to be nice to you have to be nice to everyone. and probably the only people who can manage that are the people who are genuinely good.in a sufficiently connected and unpredictable world you cant seem good without being good.as often happens ron discovered how to be the investor of the future by accident. he didnt foresee the future of startup investing realize it would pay to be upstanding and force himself to behave that way. it would feel unnatural to him to behave any other way. he was already living in the future.fortunately that future is not limited to the startup world. the startup world is more transparent and unpredictable than most but almost everywhere the trend is in that direction.notes1 im not saying that if you sort investors by benevolence youve also sorted them by returns but rather that if you do a scatterplot with benevolence on the x axis and returns on the y youd see a clear upward trend.2 y combinator in particular because it aggregates data from so many startups has a pretty comprehensive view of investor behavior.

i recently got an email from a founder that helped me understand something important why its safe for startup founders to be nice people.i grew up with a cartoon idea of a very successful businessman in the cartoon it was always a man a rapacious cigarsmoking tablethumping guy in his fifties who wins by exercising power and isnt too fussy about how. as ive written before one of the things that has surprised me most about startups is how few of the most successful founders are like that. maybe successful people in other industries are i dont know but not startup founders. 1i knew this empirically but i never saw the math of why till i got this founders email. in it he said he worried that he was fundamentally softhearted and tended to give away too much for free. he thought perhaps he needed a little dose of sociopathness.i told him not to worry about it because so long as he built something good enough to spread by word of mouth hed have a superlinear growth curve. if he was bad at extracting money from people at worst this curve would be some constant multiple less than 1 of what it might have been. but a constant multiple of any curve is exactly the same shape. the numbers on the y axis are smaller but the curve is just as steep and when anything grows at the rate of a successful startup the y axis will take care of itself.some examples will make this clear. suppose your company is making 1000 a month now and youve made something so great that its growing at 5 a week. two years from now youll be making about 160k a month.now suppose youre so unrapacious that you only extract half as much from your users as you could. that means two years later youll be making 80k a month instead of 160k. how far behind are you how long will it take to catch up with where youd have been if you were extracting every penny a mere 15 weeks. after two years the unrapacious founder is only 3.5 months behind the rapacious one. 2if youre going to optimize a number the one to choose is your growth rate. suppose as before that you only extract half as much from users as you could but that youre able to grow 6 a week instead of 5. now how are you doing compared to the rapacious founder after two years youre already ahead214k a month versus 160kand pulling away fast. in another year youll be making 4.4 million a month to the rapacious founders 2 million.obviously one case where it would help to be rapacious is when growth depends on that. what makes startups different is that usually it doesnt. startups usually win by making something so great that people recommend it to their friends. and being rapacious not only doesnt help you do that but probably hurts. 3the reason startup founders can safely be nice is that making great things is compounded and rapacity isnt.so if youre a founder heres a deal you can make with yourself that will both make you happy and make your company successful. tell yourself you can be as nice as you want so long as you work hard on your growth rate to compensate. most successful startups make that tradeoff unconsciously. maybe if you do it consciously youll do it even better.notes1 many think successful startup founders are driven by money. in fact the secret weapon of the most successful founders is that they arent. if they were theyd have taken one of the acquisition offers that every fastgrowing startup gets on the way up. what drives the most successful founders is the same thing that drives most people who make things the company is their project.2 in fact since 2  1.05  15 the unrapacious founder is always 15 weeks behind the rapacious one.3 the other reason it might help to be good at squeezing money out of customers is that startups usually lose money at first and making more per customer makes it easier to get to profitability before your initial funding runs out. but while it is very common for startups to die from running through their initial funding and then being unable to raise more the underlying cause is usually slow growth or excessive spending rather than insufficient effort to extract money from existing customers.

there are great startup ideas lying around unexploited right under our noses. one reason we dont see them is a phenomenon i call schlep blindness. schlep was originally a yiddish word but has passed into general use in the us. it means a tedious unpleasant task.no one likes schleps but hackers especially dislike them. most hackers who start startups wish they could do it by just writing some clever software putting it on a server somewhere and watching the money roll inwithout ever having to talk to users or negotiate with other companies or deal with other peoples broken code. maybe thats possible but i havent seen it.one of the many things we do at y combinator is teach hackers about the inevitability of schleps. no you cant start a startup by just writing code. i remember going through this realization myself. there was a point in 1995 when i was still trying to convince myself i could start a company by just writing code. but i soon learned from experience that schleps are not merely inevitable but pretty much what business consists of. a company is defined by the schleps it will undertake. and schleps should be dealt with the same way youd deal with a cold swimming pool just jump in. which is not to say you should seek out unpleasant work per se but that you should never shrink from it if its on the path to something great.the most dangerous thing about our dislike of schleps is that much of it is unconscious. your unconscious wont even let you see ideas that involve painful schleps. thats schlep blindness.the phenomenon isnt limited to startups. most people dont consciously decide not to be in as good physical shape as olympic athletes for example. their unconscious mind decides for them shrinking from the work involved.the most striking example i know of schlep blindness is stripe or rather stripes idea. for over a decade every hacker whod ever had to process payments online knew how painful the experience was. thousands of people must have known about this problem. and yet when they started startups they decided to build recipe sites or aggregators for local events. why why work on problems few care much about and no one will pay for when you could fix one of the most important components of the worlds infrastructure because schlep blindness prevented people from even considering the idea of fixing payments.probably no one who applied to y combinator to work on a recipe site began by asking should we fix payments or build a recipe site and chose the recipe site. though the idea of fixing payments was right there in plain sight they never saw it because their unconscious mind shrank from the complications involved. youd have to make deals with banks. how do you do that plus youre moving money so youre going to have to deal with fraud and people trying to break into your servers. plus there are probably all sorts of regulations to comply with. its a lot more intimidating to start a startup like this than a recipe site.that scariness makes ambitious ideas doubly valuable. in addition to their intrinsic value theyre like undervalued stocks in the sense that theres less demand for them among founders. if you pick an ambitious idea youll have less competition because everyone else will have been frightened off by the challenges involved. this is also true of starting a startup generally.how do you overcome schlep blindness frankly the most valuable antidote to schlep blindness is probably ignorance. most successful founders would probably say that if theyd known when they were starting their company about the obstacles theyd have to overcome they might never have started it. maybe thats one reason the most successful startups of all so often have young founders.in practice the founders grow with the problems. but no one seems able to foresee that not even older more experienced founders. so the reason younger founders have an advantage is that they make two mistakes that cancel each other out. they dont know how much they can grow but they also dont know how much theyll need to. older founders only make the first mistake.ignorance cant solve everything though. some ideas so obviously entail alarming schleps that anyone can see them. how do you see ideas like that the trick i recommend is to take yourself out of the picture. instead of asking what problem should i solve ask what problem do i wish someone else would solve for me if someone who had to process payments before stripe had tried asking that stripe would have been one of the first things they wished for.its too late now to be stripe but theres plenty still broken in the world if you know how to see it.

silicon valley proper is mostly suburban sprawl. at first glance it doesnt seem theres anything to see. its not the sort of place that has conspicuous monuments. but if you look there are subtle signs youre in a place thats different from other places.1. stanford universitystanford is a strange place. structurally it is to an ordinary university what suburbia is to a city. its enormously spread out and feels surprisingly empty much of the time. but notice the weather. its probably perfect. and notice the beautiful mountains to the west. and though you cant see it cosmopolitan san francisco is 40 minutes to the north. that combination is much of the reason silicon valley grew up around this university and not some other one.2. university avea surprising amount of the work of the valley is done in the cafes on or just off university ave in palo alto. if you visit on a weekday between 10 and 5 youll often see founders pitching investors. in case you cant tell the founders are the ones leaning forward eagerly and the investors are the ones sitting back with slightly pained expressions.3. the lucky officethe office at 165 university ave was googles first. then it was paypals. now its wepays. the interesting thing about it is the location. its a smart move to put a startup in a place with restaurants and people walking around instead of in an office park because then the people who work there want to stay there instead of fleeing as soon as conventional working hours end. they go out for dinner together talk about ideas and then come back and implement them.its important to realize that googles current location in an office park is not where they started its just where they were forced to move when they needed more space. facebook was till recently across the street till they too had to move because they needed more space.4. old palo altopalo alto was not originally a suburb. for the first 100 years or so of its existence it was a college town out in the countryside. then in the mid 1950s it was engulfed in a wave of suburbia that raced down the peninsula. but palo alto north of oregon expressway still feels noticeably different from the area around it. its one of the nicest places in the valley. the buildings are old though increasingly they are being torn down and replaced with generic mcmansions and the trees are tall. but houses are very expensivearound 1000 per square foot. this is postexit silicon valley.5. sand hill roadits interesting to see the vcs offices on the north side of sand hill road precisely because theyre so boringly uniform. the buildings are all more or less the same their exteriors express very little and they are arranged in a confusing maze. ive been visiting them for years and i still occasionally get lost. its not a coincidence. these buildings are a pretty accurate reflection of the vc business.if you go on a weekday you may see groups of founders there to meet vcs. but mostly you wont see anyone bustling is the last word youd use to describe the atmos. visiting sand hill road reminds you that the opposite of down and dirty would be up and clean.6. castro streetits a tossup whether castro street or university ave should be considered the heart of the valley now. university ave would have been 10 years ago. but palo alto is getting expensive. increasingly startups are located in mountain view and palo alto is a place they come to meet investors. palo alto has a lot of different cafes but there is one that clearly dominates in mountain view red rock.7. googlegoogle spread out from its first building in mountain view to a lot of the surrounding ones. but because the buildings were built at different times by different people the place doesnt have the sterile walledoff feel that a typical large companys headquarters have. it definitely has a flavor of its own though. you sense there is something afoot. the general atmos is vaguely utopian there are lots of priuses and people who look like they drive them.you cant get into google unless you know someone there. its very much worth seeing inside if you can though. ditto for facebook at the end of california ave in palo alto though there is nothing to see outside.8. skyline driveskyline drive runs along the crest of the santa cruz mountains. on one side is the valley and on the other is the seawhich because its cold and foggy and has few harbors plays surprisingly little role in the lives of people in the valley considering how close it is. along some parts of skyline the dominant trees are huge redwoods and in others theyre live oaks. redwoods mean those are the parts where the fog off the coast comes in at night redwoods condense rain out of fog. the mrosd manages a collection of great walking trails off skyline.9. 280silicon valley has two highways running the length of it 101 which is pretty ugly and 280 which is one of the more beautiful highways in the world. i always take 280 when i have a choice. notice the long narrow lake to the west thats the san andreas fault. it runs along the base of the hills then heads uphill through portola valley. one of the mrosd trails runs right along the fault. a string of rich neighborhoods runs along the foothills to the west of 280 woodside portola valley los altos hills saratoga los gatos.slac goes right under 280 a little bit south of sand hill road. and a couple miles south of that is the valleys equivalent of the welcome to las vegas sign the dish.notesi skipped the computer history museum because this is a list of where to see the valley itself not where to see artifacts from it. i also skipped san jose. san jose calls itself the capital of silicon valley but when people in the valley use the phrase the city they mean san francisco. san jose is a dotted line on a map.

the segway hasnt delivered on its initial promise to put it mildly. there are several reasons why but one is that people dont want to be seen riding them. someone riding a segway looks like a dork.my friend trevor blackwell built his own segway which we called the segwell. he also built a onewheeled version the eunicycle which looks exactly like a regular unicycle till you realize the rider isnt pedaling. he has ridden them both to downtown mountain view to get coffee. when he rides the eunicycle people smile at him. but when he rides the segwell they shout abuse from their cars too lazy to walk ya fuckin homowhy do segways provoke this reaction the reason you look like a dork riding a segway is that you look smug. you dont seem to be working hard enough.someone riding a motorcycle isnt working any harder. but because hes sitting astride it he seems to be making an effort. when youre riding a segway youre just standing there. and someone whos being whisked along while seeming to do no work  someone in a sedan chair for example  cant help but look smug.try this thought experiment and it becomes clear imagine something that worked like the segway but that you rode with one foot in front of the other like a skateboard. that wouldnt seem nearly as uncool.so there may be a way to capture more of the market segway hoped to reach make a version that doesnt look so easy for the rider. it would also be helpful if the styling was in the tradition of skateboards or bicycles rather than medical devices.curiously enough what got segway into this problem was that the company was itself a kind of segway. it was too easy for them they were too successful raising money. if theyd had to grow the company gradually by iterating through several versions they sold to real users theyd have learned pretty quickly that people looked stupid riding them. instead they had enough to work in secret. they had focus groups aplenty im sure but they didnt have the people yelling insults out of cars. so they never realized they were zooming confidently down a blind alley.

when we sold our startup in 1998 i suddenly got a lot of money. i now had to think about something i hadnt had to think about before how not to lose it. i knew it was possible to go from rich to poor just as it was possible to go from poor to rich. but while id spent a lot of the past several years studying the paths from poor to rich i knew practically nothing about the paths from rich to poor. now in order to avoid them i had to learn where they were.so i started to pay attention to how fortunes are lost. if youd asked me as a kid how rich people became poor id have said by spending all their money. thats how it happens in books and movies because thats the colorful way to do it. but in fact the way most fortunes are lost is not through excessive expenditure but through bad investments.its hard to spend a fortune without noticing. someone with ordinary tastes would find it hard to blow through more than a few tens of thousands of dollars without thinking wow im spending a lot of money. whereas if you start trading derivatives you can lose a million dollars as much as you want really in the blink of an eye.in most peoples minds spending money on luxuries sets off alarms that making investments doesnt. luxuries seem selfindulgent. and unless you got the money by inheriting it or winning a lottery youve already been thoroughly trained that selfindulgence leads to trouble. investing bypasses those alarms. youre not spending the money youre just moving it from one asset to another. which is why people trying to sell you expensive things say its an investment.the solution is to develop new alarms. this can be a tricky business because while the alarms that prevent you from overspending are so basic that they may even be in our dna the ones that prevent you from making bad investments have to be learned and are sometimes fairly counterintuitive.a few days ago i realized something surprising the situation with time is much the same as with money. the most dangerous way to lose time is not to spend it having fun but to spend it doing fake work. when you spend time having fun you know youre being selfindulgent. alarms start to go off fairly quickly. if i woke up one morning and sat down on the sofa and watched tv all day id feel like something was terribly wrong. just thinking about it makes me wince. id start to feel uncomfortable after sitting on a sofa watching tv for 2 hours let alone a whole day.and yet ive definitely had days when i might as well have sat in front of a tv all day  days at the end of which if i asked myself what i got done that day the answer would have been basically nothing. i feel bad after these days too but nothing like as bad as id feel if i spent the whole day on the sofa watching tv. if i spent a whole day watching tv id feel like i was descending into perdition. but the same alarms dont go off on the days when i get nothing done because im doing stuff that seems superficially like real work. dealing with email for example. you do it sitting at a desk. its not fun. so it must be work.with time as with money avoiding pleasure is no longer enough to protect you. it probably was enough to protect huntergatherers and perhaps all preindustrial societies. so nature and nurture combine to make us avoid selfindulgence. but the world has gotten more complicated the most dangerous traps now are new behaviors that bypass our alarms about selfindulgence by mimicking more virtuous types. and the worst thing is theyre not even fun.

i try to write using ordinary words and simple sentences.that kind of writing is easier to read and the easier something is to read the more deeply readers will engage with it. the less energy they expend on your prose the more theyll have left for your ideas.and the further theyll read. most readers energy tends to flag part way through an article or essay. if the friction of reading is low enough more keep going till the end.theres an italian dish called saltimbocca which means leap into the mouth. my goal when writing might be called saltintesta the ideas leap into your head and you barely notice the words that got them there.its too much to hope that writing could ever be pure ideas. you might not even want it to be. but for most writers most of the time thats the goal to aim for. the gap between most writing and pure ideas is not filled with poetry.plus its more considerate to write simply. when you write in a fancy way to impress people youre making them do extra work just so you can seem cool. its like trailing a long train behind you that readers have to carry.and remember if youre writing in english that a lot of your readers wont be native english speakers. their understanding of ideas may be way ahead of their understanding of english. so you cant assume that writing about a difficult topic means you can use difficult words.of course fancy writing doesnt just conceal ideas. it can also conceal the lack of them. thats why some people write that way to conceal the fact that they have nothing to say. whereas writing simply keeps you honest. if you say nothing simply it will be obvious to everyone including you.simple writing also lasts better. people reading your stuff in the future will be in much the same position as people from other countries reading it today. the culture and the language will have changed. its not vain to care about that any more than its vain for a woodworker to build a chair to last.indeed lasting is not merely an accidental quality of chairs or writing. its a sign you did a good job.but although these are all real advantages of writing simply none of them are why i do it. the main reason i write simply is that it offends me not to. when i write a sentence that seems too complicated or that uses unnecessarily intellectual words it doesnt seem fancy to me. it seems clumsy.there are of course times when you want to use a complicated sentence or fancy word for effect. but you should never do it by accident.the other reason my writing ends up being simple is the way i do it. i write the first draft fast then spend days editing it trying to get everything just right. much of this editing is cutting and that makes simple writing even simpler.

if you asked people what was special about einstein most would say that he was really smart. even the ones who tried to give you a more sophisticatedsounding answer would probably think this first. till a few years ago i would have given the same answer myself. but that wasnt what was special about einstein. what was special about him was that he had important new ideas. being very smart was a necessary precondition for having those ideas but the two are not identical.it may seem a hairsplitting distinction to point out that intelligence and its consequences are not identical but it isnt. theres a big gap between them. anyone whos spent time around universities and research labs knows how big. there are a lot of genuinely smart people who dont achieve very much.i grew up thinking that being smart was the thing most to be desired. perhaps you did too. but i bet its not what you really want. imagine you had a choice between being really smart but discovering nothing new and being less smart but discovering lots of new ideas. surely youd take the latter. i would. the choice makes me uncomfortable but when you see the two options laid out explicitly like that its obvious which is better.the reason the choice makes me uncomfortable is that being smart still feels like the thing that matters even though i know intellectually that it isnt. i spent so many years thinking it was. the circumstances of childhood are a perfect storm for fostering this illusion. intelligence is much easier to measure than the value of new ideas and youre constantly being judged by it. whereas even the kids who will ultimately discover new things arent usually discovering them yet. for kids that way inclined intelligence is the only game in town.there are more subtle reasons too which persist long into adulthood. intelligence wins in conversation and thus becomes the basis of the dominance hierarchy. 1 plus having new ideas is such a new thing historically and even now done by so few people that society hasnt yet assimilated the fact that this is the actual destination and intelligence merely a means to an end. 2why do so many smart people fail to discover anything new viewed from that direction the question seems a rather depressing one. but theres another way to look at it thats not just more optimistic but more interesting as well. clearly intelligence is not the only ingredient in having new ideas. what are the other ingredients are they things we could cultivatebecause the trouble with intelligence they say is that its mostly inborn. the evidence for this seems fairly convincing especially considering that most of us dont want it to be true and the evidence thus has to face a stiff headwind. but im not going to get into that question here because its the other ingredients in new ideas that i care about and its clear that many of them can be cultivated.that means the truth is excitingly different from the story i got as a kid. if intelligence is what matters and also mostly inborn the natural consequence is a sort of brave new world fatalism. the best you can do is figure out what sort of work you have an aptitude for so that whatever intelligence you were born with will at least be put to the best use and then work as hard as you can at it. whereas if intelligence isnt what matters but only one of several ingredients in what does and many of those arent inborn things get more interesting. you have a lot more control but the problem of how to arrange your life becomes that much more complicated.so what are the other ingredients in having new ideas the fact that i can even ask this question proves the point i raised earlier  that society hasnt assimilated the fact that its this and not intelligence that matters. otherwise wed all know the answers to such a fundamental question. 3im not going to try to provide a complete catalogue of the other ingredients here. this is the first time ive posed the question to myself this way and i think it may take a while to answer. but i wrote recently about one of the most important an obsessive interest in a particular topic. and this can definitely be cultivated.another quality you need in order to discover new ideas is independentmindedness. i wouldnt want to claim that this is distinct from intelligence  id be reluctant to call someone smart who wasnt independentminded  but though largely inborn this quality seems to be something that can be cultivated to some extent.there are general techniques for having new ideas  for example for working on your own projects and for overcoming the obstacles you face with early work  and these can all be learned. some of them can be learned by societies. and there are also collections of techniques for generating specific types of new ideas like startup ideas and essay topics.and of course there are a lot of fairly mundane ingredients in discovering new ideas like working hard getting enough sleep avoiding certain kinds of stress having the right colleagues and finding tricks for working on what you want even when its not what youre supposed to be working on. anything that prevents people from doing great work has an inverse that helps them to. and this class of ingredients is not as boring as it might seem at first. for example having new ideas is generally associated with youth. but perhaps its not youth per se that yields new ideas but specific things that come with youth like good health and lack of responsibilities. investigating this might lead to strategies that will help people of any age to have better ideas.one of the most surprising ingredients in having new ideas is writing ability. theres a class of new ideas that are best discovered by writing essays and books. and that by is deliberate you dont think of the ideas first and then merely write them down. there is a kind of thinking that one does by writing and if youre clumsy at writing or dont enjoy doing it that will get in your way if you try to do this kind of thinking. 4i predict the gap between intelligence and new ideas will turn out to be an interesting place. if we think of this gap merely as a measure of unrealized potential it becomes a sort of wasteland that we try to hurry through with our eyes averted. but if we flip the question and start inquiring into the other ingredients in new ideas that it implies must exist we can mine this gap for discoveries about discovery.notes1 what wins in conversation depends on who with. it ranges from mere aggressiveness at the bottom through quickwittedness in the middle to something closer to actual intelligence at the top though probably always with some component of quickwittedness.2 just as intelligence isnt the only ingredient in having new ideas having new ideas isnt the only thing intelligence is useful for. its also useful for example in diagnosing problems and figuring out how to fix them. both overlap with having new ideas but both have an end that doesnt.those ways of using intelligence are much more common than having new ideas. and in such cases intelligence is even harder to distinguish from its consequences.3 some would attribute the difference between intelligence and having new ideas to creativity but this doesnt seem a very useful term. as well as being pretty vague its shifted half a frame sideways from what we care about its neither separable from intelligence nor responsible for all the difference between intelligence and having new ideas.4 curiously enough this essay is an example. it started out as an essay about writing ability. but when i came to the distinction between intelligence and having new ideas that seemed so much more important that i turned the original essay inside out making that the topic and my original topic one of the points in it. as in many other fields that level of reworking is easier to contemplate once youve had a lot of practice.

im not a very good speaker. i say um a lot. sometimes i have to pause when i lose my train of thought. i wish i were a better speaker. but i dont wish i were a better speaker like i wish i were a better writer. what i really want is to have good ideas and thats a much bigger part of being a good writer than being a good speaker.having good ideas is most of writing well. if you know what youre talking about you can say it in the plainest words and youll be perceived as having a good style. with speaking its the opposite having good ideas is an alarmingly small component of being a good speaker.i first noticed this at a conference several years ago. there was another speaker who was much better than me. he had all of us roaring with laughter. i seemed awkward and halting by comparison. afterward i put my talk online like i usually do. as i was doing it i tried to imagine what a transcript of the other guys talk would be like and it was only then i realized he hadnt said very much.maybe this would have been obvious to someone who knew more about speaking but it was a revelation to me how much less ideas mattered in speaking than writing. 1a few years later i heard a talk by someone who was not merely a better speaker than me but a famous speaker. boy was he good. so i decided id pay close attention to what he said to learn how he did it. after about ten sentences i found myself thinking i dont want to be a good speaker.being a really good speaker is not merely orthogonal to having good ideas but in many ways pushes you in the opposite direction. for example when i give a talk i usually write it out beforehand. i know thats a mistake i know delivering a prewritten talk makes it harder to engage with an audience. the way to get the attention of an audience is to give them your full attention and when youre delivering a prewritten talk your attention is always divided between the audience and the talk  even if youve memorized it. if you want to engage an audience its better to start with no more than an outline of what you want to say and ad lib the individual sentences. but if you do that you might spend no more time thinking about each sentence than it takes to say it. 2 occasionally the stimulation of talking to a live audience makes you think of new things but in general this is not going to generate ideas as well as writing does where you can spend as long on each sentence as you want.if you rehearse a prewritten speech enough you can get asymptotically close to the sort of engagement you get when speaking ad lib. actors do. but here again theres a tradeoff between smoothness and ideas. all the time you spend practicing a talk you could instead spend making it better. actors dont face that temptation except in the rare cases where theyve written the script but any speaker does. before i give a talk i can usually be found sitting in a corner somewhere with a copy printed out on paper trying to rehearse it in my head. but i always end up spending most of the time rewriting it instead. every talk i give ends up being given from a manuscript full of things crossed out and rewritten. which of course makes me um even more because i havent had any time to practice the new bits. 3depending on your audience there are even worse tradeoffs than these. audiences like to be flattered they like jokes they like to be swept off their feet by a vigorous stream of words. as you decrease the intelligence of the audience being a good speaker is increasingly a matter of being a good bullshitter. thats true in writing too of course but the descent is steeper with talks. any given person is dumber as a member of an audience than as a reader. just as a speaker ad libbing can only spend as long thinking about each sentence as it takes to say it a person hearing a talk can only spend as long thinking about each sentence as it takes to hear it. plus people in an audience are always affected by the reactions of those around them and the reactions that spread from person to person in an audience are disproportionately the more brutish sort just as low notes travel through walls better than high ones. every audience is an incipient mob and a good speaker uses that. part of the reason i laughed so much at the talk by the good speaker at that conference was that everyone else did. 4so are talks useless theyre certainly inferior to the written word as a source of ideas. but thats not all talks are good for. when i go to a talk its usually because im interested in the speaker. listening to a talk is the closest most of us can get to having a conversation with someone like the president who doesnt have time to meet individually with all the people who want to meet him.talks are also good at motivating me to do things. its probably no coincidence that so many famous speakers are described as motivational speakers. that may be what public speaking is really for. its probably what it was originally for. the emotional reactions you can elicit with a talk can be a powerful force. i wish i could say that this force was more often used for good than ill but im not sure.notes1 im not talking here about academic talks which are a different type of thing. while the audience at an academic talk might appreciate a joke they will or at least should make a conscious effort to see what new ideas youre presenting.2 thats the lower bound. in practice you can often do better because talks are usually about things youve written or talked about before and when you ad lib you end up reproducing some of those sentences. like early medieval architecture impromptu talks are made of spolia. which feels a bit dishonest incidentally because you have to deliver these sentences as if youd just thought of them.3 robert morris points out that there is a way in which practicing talks makes them better reading a talk out loud can expose awkward parts. i agree and in fact i read most things i write out loud at least once for that reason.4 for sufficiently small audiences it may not be true that being part of an audience makes people dumber. the real decline seems to set in when the audience gets too big for the talk to feel like a conversation  maybe around 10 people.

the way to get startup ideas is not to try to think of startup ideas. its to look for problems preferably problems you have yourself.the very best startup ideas tend to have three things in common theyre something the founders themselves want that they themselves can build and that few others realize are worth doing. microsoft apple yahoo google and facebook all began this way.problemswhy is it so important to work on a problem you have among other things it ensures the problem really exists. it sounds obvious to say you should only work on problems that exist. and yet by far the most common mistake startups make is to solve problems no one has.i made it myself. in 1995 i started a company to put art galleries online. but galleries didnt want to be online. its not how the art business works. so why did i spend 6 months working on this stupid idea because i didnt pay attention to users. i invented a model of the world that didnt correspond to reality and worked from that. i didnt notice my model was wrong until i tried to convince users to pay for what wed built. even then i took embarrassingly long to catch on. i was attached to my model of the world and id spent a lot of time on the software. they had to want itwhy do so many founders build things no one wants because they begin by trying to think of startup ideas. that m.o. is doubly dangerous it doesnt merely yield few good ideas it yields bad ideas that sound plausible enough to fool you into working on them.at yc we call these madeup or sitcom startup ideas. imagine one of the characters on a tv show was starting a startup. the writers would have to invent something for it to do. but coming up with good startup ideas is hard. its not something you can do for the asking. so unless they got amazingly lucky the writers would come up with an idea that sounded plausible but was actually bad.for example a social network for pet owners. it doesnt sound obviously mistaken. millions of people have pets. often they care a lot about their pets and spend a lot of money on them. surely many of these people would like a site where they could talk to other pet owners. not all of them perhaps but if just 2 or 3 percent were regular visitors you could have millions of users. you could serve them targeted offers and maybe charge for premium features. 1the danger of an idea like this is that when you run it by your friends with pets they dont say i would never use this. they say yeah maybe i could see using something like that. even when the startup launches it will sound plausible to a lot of people. they dont want to use it themselves at least not right now but they could imagine other people wanting it. sum that reaction across the entire population and you have zero users. 2wellwhen a startup launches there have to be at least some users who really need what theyre making  not just people who could see themselves using it one day but who want it urgently. usually this initial group of users is small for the simple reason that if there were something that large numbers of people urgently needed and that could be built with the amount of effort a startup usually puts into a version one it would probably already exist. which means you have to compromise on one dimension you can either build something a large number of people want a small amount or something a small number of people want a large amount. choose the latter. not all ideas of that type are good startup ideas but nearly all good startup ideas are of that type.imagine a graph whose x axis represents all the people who might want what youre making and whose y axis represents how much they want it. if you invert the scale on the y axis you can envision companies as holes. google is an immense crater hundreds of millions of people use it and they need it a lot. a startup just starting out cant expect to excavate that much volume. so you have two choices about the shape of hole you start with. you can either dig a hole thats broad but shallow or one thats narrow and deep like a well.madeup startup ideas are usually of the first type. lots of people are mildly interested in a social network for pet owners.nearly all good startup ideas are of the second type. microsoft was a well when they made altair basic. there were only a couple thousand altair owners but without this software they were programming in machine language. thirty years later facebook had the same shape. their first site was exclusively for harvard students of which there are only a few thousand but those few thousand users wanted it a lot.when you have an idea for a startup ask yourself who wants this right now who wants this so much that theyll use it even when its a crappy version one made by a twoperson startup theyve never heard of if you cant answer that the idea is probably bad. 3you dont need the narrowness of the well per se. its depth you need you get narrowness as a byproduct of optimizing for depth and speed. but you almost always do get it. in practice the link between depth and narrowness is so strong that its a good sign when you know that an idea will appeal strongly to a specific group or type of user.but while demand shaped like a well is almost a necessary condition for a good startup idea its not a sufficient one. if mark zuckerberg had built something that could only ever have appealed to harvard students it would not have been a good startup idea. facebook was a good idea because it started with a small market there was a fast path out of. colleges are similar enough that if you build a facebook that works at harvard it will work at any college. so you spread rapidly through all the colleges. once you have all the college students you get everyone else simply by letting them in.similarly for microsoft basic for the altair basic for other machines other languages besides basic operating systems applications ipo.selfhow do you tell whether theres a path out of an idea how do you tell whether something is the germ of a giant company or just a niche product often you cant. the founders of airbnb didnt realize at first how big a market they were tapping. initially they had a much narrower idea. they were going to let hosts rent out space on their floors during conventions. they didnt foresee the expansion of this idea it forced itself upon them gradually. all they knew at first is that they were onto something. thats probably as much as bill gates or mark zuckerberg knew at first.occasionally its obvious from the beginning when theres a path out of the initial niche. and sometimes i can see a path thats not immediately obvious thats one of our specialties at yc. but there are limits to how well this can be done no matter how much experience you have. the most important thing to understand about paths out of the initial idea is the metafact that these are hard to see.so if you cant predict whether theres a path out of an idea how do you choose between ideas the truth is disappointing but interesting if youre the right sort of person you have the right sort of hunches. if youre at the leading edge of a field thats changing fast when you have a hunch that something is worth doing youre more likely to be right.in zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance robert pirsig saysyou want to know how to paint a perfect painting its easy. make yourself perfect and then just paint naturally.ive wondered about that passage since i read it in high school. im not sure how useful his advice is for painting specifically but it fits this situation well. empirically the way to have good startup ideas is to become the sort of person who has them.being at the leading edge of a field doesnt mean you have to be one of the people pushing it forward. you can also be at the leading edge as a user. it was not so much because he was a programmer that facebook seemed a good idea to mark zuckerberg as because he used computers so much. if youd asked most 40 year olds in 2004 whether theyd like to publish their lives semipublicly on the internet theyd have been horrified at the idea. but mark already lived online to him it seemed natural.paul buchheit says that people at the leading edge of a rapidly changing field live in the future. combine that with pirsig and you getlive in the future then build whats missing.that describes the way many if not most of the biggest startups got started. neither apple nor yahoo nor google nor facebook were even supposed to be companies at first. they grew out of things their founders built because there seemed a gap in the world.if you look at the way successful founders have had their ideas its generally the result of some external stimulus hitting a prepared mind. bill gates and paul allen hear about the altair and think i bet we could write a basic interpreter for it. drew houston realizes hes forgotten his usb stick and thinks i really need to make my files live online. lots of people heard about the altair. lots forgot usb sticks. the reason those stimuli caused those founders to start companies was that their experiences had prepared them to notice the opportunities they represented.the verb you want to be using with respect to startup ideas is not think up but notice. at yc we call ideas that grow naturally out of the founders own experiences organic startup ideas. the most successful startups almost all begin this way.that may not have been what you wanted to hear. you may have expected recipes for coming up with startup ideas and instead im telling you that the key is to have a mind thats prepared in the right way. but disappointing though it may be this is the truth. and it is a recipe of a sort just one that in the worst case takes a year rather than a weekend.if youre not at the leading edge of some rapidly changing field you can get to one. for example anyone reasonably smart can probably get to an edge of programming e.g. building mobile apps in a year. since a successful startup will consume at least 35 years of your life a years preparation would be a reasonable investment. especially if youre also looking for a cofounder. 4you dont have to learn programming to be at the leading edge of a domain thats changing fast. other domains change fast. but while learning to hack is not necessary it is for the forseeable future sufficient. as marc andreessen put it software is eating the world and this trend has decades left to run.knowing how to hack also means that when you have ideas youll be able to implement them. thats not absolutely necessary jeff bezos couldnt but its an advantage. its a big advantage when youre considering an idea like putting a college facebook online if instead of merely thinking thats an interesting idea you can think instead thats an interesting idea. ill try building an initial version tonight. its even better when youre both a programmer and the target user because then the cycle of generating new versions and testing them on users can happen inside one head.noticingonce youre living in the future in some respect the way to notice startup ideas is to look for things that seem to be missing. if youre really at the leading edge of a rapidly changing field there will be things that are obviously missing. what wont be obvious is that theyre startup ideas. so if you want to find startup ideas dont merely turn on the filter whats missing also turn off every other filter particularly could this be a big company theres plenty of time to apply that test later. but if youre thinking about that initially it may not only filter out lots of good ideas but also cause you to focus on bad ones.most things that are missing will take some time to see. you almost have to trick yourself into seeing the ideas around you.but you know the ideas are out there. this is not one of those problems where there might not be an answer. its impossibly unlikely that this is the exact moment when technological progress stops. you can be sure people are going to build things in the next few years that will make you think what did i do before xand when these problems get solved they will probably seem flamingly obvious in retrospect. what you need to do is turn off the filters that usually prevent you from seeing them. the most powerful is simply taking the current state of the world for granted. even the most radically openminded of us mostly do that. you couldnt get from your bed to the front door if you stopped to question everything.but if youre looking for startup ideas you can sacrifice some of the efficiency of taking the status quo for granted and start to question things. why is your inbox overflowing because you get a lot of email or because its hard to get email out of your inbox why do you get so much email what problems are people trying to solve by sending you email are there better ways to solve them and why is it hard to get emails out of your inbox why do you keep emails around after youve read them is an inbox the optimal tool for thatpay particular attention to things that chafe you. the advantage of taking the status quo for granted is not just that it makes life locally more efficient but also that it makes life more tolerable. if you knew about all the things well get in the next 50 years but dont have yet youd find present day life pretty constraining just as someone from the present would if they were sent back 50 years in a time machine. when something annoys you it could be because youre living in the future.when you find the right sort of problem you should probably be able to describe it as obvious at least to you. when we started viaweb all the online stores were built by hand by web designers making individual html pages. it was obvious to us as programmers that these sites would have to be generated by software. 5which means strangely enough that coming up with startup ideas is a question of seeing the obvious. that suggests how weird this process is youre trying to see things that are obvious and yet that you hadnt seen.since what you need to do here is loosen up your own mind it may be best not to make too much of a direct frontal attack on the problem  i.e. to sit down and try to think of ideas. the best plan may be just to keep a background process running looking for things that seem to be missing. work on hard problems driven mainly by curiosity but have a second self watching over your shoulder taking note of gaps and anomalies. 6give yourself some time. you have a lot of control over the rate at which you turn yours into a prepared mind but you have less control over the stimuli that spark ideas when they hit it. if bill gates and paul allen had constrained themselves to come up with a startup idea in one month what if theyd chosen a month before the altair appeared they probably would have worked on a less promising idea. drew houston did work on a less promising idea before dropbox an sat prep startup. but dropbox was a much better idea both in the absolute sense and also as a match for his skills. 7a good way to trick yourself into noticing ideas is to work on projects that seem like theyd be cool. if you do that youll naturally tend to build things that are missing. it wouldnt seem as interesting to build something that already existed.just as trying to think up startup ideas tends to produce bad ones working on things that could be dismissed as toys often produces good ones. when something is described as a toy that means it has everything an idea needs except being important. its cool users love it it just doesnt matter. but if youre living in the future and you build something cool that users love it may matter more than outsiders think. microcomputers seemed like toys when apple and microsoft started working on them. im old enough to remember that era the usual term for people with their own microcomputers was hobbyists. backrub seemed like an inconsequential science project. the facebook was just a way for undergrads to stalk one another.at yc were excited when we meet startups working on things that we could imagine knowitalls on forums dismissing as toys. to us thats positive evidence an idea is good.if you can afford to take a long view and arguably you cant afford not to you can turn live in the future and build whats missing into something even betterlive in the future and build what seems interesting.schoolthats what id advise college students to do rather than trying to learn about entrepreneurship. entrepreneurship is something you learn best by doing it. the examples of the most successful founders make that clear. what you should be spending your time on in college is ratcheting yourself into the future. college is an incomparable opportunity to do that. what a waste to sacrifice an opportunity to solve the hard part of starting a startup  becoming the sort of person who can have organic startup ideas  by spending time learning about the easy part. especially since you wont even really learn about it any more than youd learn about sex in a class. all youll learn is the words for things.the clash of domains is a particularly fruitful source of ideas. if you know a lot about programming and you start learning about some other field youll probably see problems that software could solve. in fact youre doubly likely to find good problems in another domain a the inhabitants of that domain are not as likely as software people to have already solved their problems with software and b since you come into the new domain totally ignorant you dont even know what the status quo is to take it for granted.so if youre a cs major and you want to start a startup instead of taking a class on entrepreneurship youre better off taking a class on say genetics. or better still go work for a biotech company. cs majors normally get summer jobs at computer hardware or software companies. but if you want to find startup ideas you might do better to get a summer job in some unrelated field. 8or dont take any extra classes and just build things. its no coincidence that microsoft and facebook both got started in january. at harvard that is or was reading period when students have no classes to attend because theyre supposed to be studying for finals. 9but dont feel like you have to build things that will become startups. thats premature optimization. just build things. preferably with other students. its not just the classes that make a university such a good place to crank oneself into the future. youre also surrounded by other people trying to do the same thing. if you work together with them on projects youll end up producing not just organic ideas but organic ideas with organic founding teams  and that empirically is the best combination.beware of research. if an undergrad writes something all his friends start using its quite likely to represent a good startup idea. whereas a phd dissertation is extremely unlikely to. for some reason the more a project has to count as research the less likely it is to be something that could be turned into a startup. 10 i think the reason is that the subset of ideas that count as research is so narrow that its unlikely that a project that satisfied that constraint would also satisfy the orthogonal constraint of solving users problems. whereas when students or professors build something as a sideproject they automatically gravitate toward solving users problems  perhaps even with an additional energy that comes from being freed from the constraints of research.competitionbecause a good idea should seem obvious when you have one youll tend to feel that youre late. dont let that deter you. worrying that youre late is one of the signs of a good idea. ten minutes of searching the web will usually settle the question. even if you find someone else working on the same thing youre probably not too late. its exceptionally rare for startups to be killed by competitors  so rare that you can almost discount the possibility. so unless you discover a competitor with the sort of lockin that would prevent users from choosing you dont discard the idea.if youre uncertain ask users. the question of whether youre too late is subsumed by the question of whether anyone urgently needs what you plan to make. if you have something that no competitor does and that some subset of users urgently need you have a beachhead. 11the question then is whether that beachhead is big enough. or more importantly whos in it if the beachhead consists of people doing something lots more people will be doing in the future then its probably big enough no matter how small it is. for example if youre building something differentiated from competitors by the fact that it works on phones but it only works on the newest phones thats probably a big enough beachhead.err on the side of doing things where youll face competitors. inexperienced founders usually give competitors more credit than they deserve. whether you succeed depends far more on you than on your competitors. so better a good idea with competitors than a bad one without.you dont need to worry about entering a crowded market so long as you have a thesis about what everyone else in it is overlooking. in fact thats a very promising starting point. google was that type of idea. your thesis has to be more precise than were going to make an x that doesnt suck though. you have to be able to phrase it in terms of something the incumbents are overlooking. best of all is when you can say that they didnt have the courage of their convictions and that your plan is what theyd have done if theyd followed through on their own insights. google was that type of idea too. the search engines that preceded them shied away from the most radical implications of what they were doing  particularly that the better a job they did the faster users would leave.a crowded market is actually a good sign because it means both that theres demand and that none of the existing solutions are good enough. a startup cant hope to enter a market thats obviously big and yet in which they have no competitors. so any startup that succeeds is either going to be entering a market with existing competitors but armed with some secret weapon that will get them all the users like google or entering a market that looks small but which will turn out to be big like microsoft. 12filtersthere are two more filters youll need to turn off if you want to notice startup ideas the unsexy filter and the schlep filter.most programmers wish they could start a startup by just writing some brilliant code pushing it to a server and having users pay them lots of money. theyd prefer not to deal with tedious problems or get involved in messy ways with the real world. which is a reasonable preference because such things slow you down. but this preference is so widespread that the space of convenient startup ideas has been stripped pretty clean. if you let your mind wander a few blocks down the street to the messy tedious ideas youll find valuable ones just sitting there waiting to be implemented.the schlep filter is so dangerous that i wrote a separate essay about the condition it induces which i called schlep blindness. i gave stripe as an example of a startup that benefited from turning off this filter and a pretty striking example it is. thousands of programmers were in a position to see this idea thousands of programmers knew how painful it was to process payments before stripe. but when they looked for startup ideas they didnt see this one because unconsciously they shrank from having to deal with payments. and dealing with payments is a schlep for stripe but not an intolerable one. in fact they might have had net less pain because the fear of dealing with payments kept most people away from this idea stripe has had comparatively smooth sailing in other areas that are sometimes painful like user acquisition. they didnt have to try very hard to make themselves heard by users because users were desperately waiting for what they were building.the unsexy filter is similar to the schlep filter except it keeps you from working on problems you despise rather than ones you fear. we overcame this one to work on viaweb. there were interesting things about the architecture of our software but we werent interested in ecommerce per se. we could see the problem was one that needed to be solved though.turning off the schlep filter is more important than turning off the unsexy filter because the schlep filter is more likely to be an illusion. and even to the degree it isnt its a worse form of selfindulgence. starting a successful startup is going to be fairly laborious no matter what. even if the product doesnt entail a lot of schleps youll still have plenty dealing with investors hiring and firing people and so on. so if theres some idea you think would be cool but youre kept away from by fear of the schleps involved dont worry any sufficiently good idea will have as many.the unsexy filter while still a source of error is not as entirely useless as the schlep filter. if youre at the leading edge of a field thats changing rapidly your ideas about whats sexy will be somewhat correlated with whats valuable in practice. particularly as you get older and more experienced. plus if you find an idea sexy youll work on it more enthusiastically. 13recipeswhile the best way to discover startup ideas is to become the sort of person who has them and then build whatever interests you sometimes you dont have that luxury. sometimes you need an idea now. for example if youre working on a startup and your initial idea turns out to be bad.for the rest of this essay ill talk about tricks for coming up with startup ideas on demand. although empirically youre better off using the organic strategy you could succeed this way. you just have to be more disciplined. when you use the organic method you dont even notice an idea unless its evidence that something is truly missing. but when you make a conscious effort to think of startup ideas you have to replace this natural constraint with selfdiscipline. youll see a lot more ideas most of them bad so you need to be able to filter them.one of the biggest dangers of not using the organic method is the example of the organic method. organic ideas feel like inspirations. there are a lot of stories about successful startups that began when the founders had what seemed a crazy idea but just knew it was promising. when you feel that about an idea youve had while trying to come up with startup ideas youre probably mistaken.when searching for ideas look in areas where you have some expertise. if youre a database expert dont build a chat app for teenagers unless youre also a teenager. maybe its a good idea but you cant trust your judgment about that so ignore it. there have to be other ideas that involve databases and whose quality you can judge. do you find it hard to come up with good ideas involving databases thats because your expertise raises your standards. your ideas about chat apps are just as bad but youre giving yourself a dunningkruger pass in that domain.the place to start looking for ideas is things you need. there must be things you need. 14one good trick is to ask yourself whether in your previous job you ever found yourself saying why doesnt someone make x if someone made x wed buy it in a second. if you can think of any x people said that about you probably have an idea. you know theres demand and people dont say that about things that are impossible to build.more generally try asking yourself whether theres something unusual about you that makes your needs different from most other peoples. youre probably not the only one. its especially good if youre different in a way people will increasingly be.if youre changing ideas one unusual thing about you is the idea youd previously been working on. did you discover any needs while working on it several wellknown startups began this way. hotmail began as something its founders wrote to talk about their previous startup idea while they were working at their day jobs. 15a particularly promising way to be unusual is to be young. some of the most valuable new ideas take root first among people in their teens and early twenties. and while young founders are at a disadvantage in some respects theyre the only ones who really understand their peers. it would have been very hard for someone who wasnt a college student to start facebook. so if youre a young founder under 23 say are there things you and your friends would like to do that current technology wont let youthe next best thing to an unmet need of your own is an unmet need of someone else. try talking to everyone you can about the gaps they find in the world. whats missing what would they like to do that they cant whats tedious or annoying particularly in their work let the conversation get general dont be trying too hard to find startup ideas. youre just looking for something to spark a thought. maybe youll notice a problem they didnt consciously realize they had because you know how to solve it.when you find an unmet need that isnt your own it may be somewhat blurry at first. the person who needs something may not know exactly what they need. in that case i often recommend that founders act like consultants  that they do what theyd do if theyd been retained to solve the problems of this one user. peoples problems are similar enough that nearly all the code you write this way will be reusable and whatever isnt will be a small price to start out certain that youve reached the bottom of the well. 16one way to ensure you do a good job solving other peoples problems is to make them your own. when rajat suri of e la carte decided to write software for restaurants he got a job as a waiter to learn how restaurants worked. that may seem like taking things to extremes but startups are extreme. we love it when founders do such things.in fact one strategy i recommend to people who need a new idea is not merely to turn off their schlep and unsexy filters but to seek out ideas that are unsexy or involve schleps. dont try to start twitter. those ideas are so rare that you cant find them by looking for them. make something unsexy that people will pay you for.a good trick for bypassing the schlep and to some extent the unsexy filter is to ask what you wish someone else would build so that you could use it. what would you pay for right nowsince startups often garbagecollect broken companies and industries it can be a good trick to look for those that are dying or deserve to and try to imagine what kind of company would profit from their demise. for example journalism is in free fall at the moment. but there may still be money to be made from something like journalism. what sort of company might cause people in the future to say this replaced journalism on some axisbut imagine asking that in the future not now. when one company or industry replaces another it usually comes in from the side. so dont look for a replacement for x look for something that people will later say turned out to be a replacement for x. and be imaginative about the axis along which the replacement occurs. traditional journalism for example is a way for readers to get information and to kill time a way for writers to make money and to get attention and a vehicle for several different types of advertising. it could be replaced on any of these axes it has already started to be on most.when startups consume incumbents they usually start by serving some small but important market that the big players ignore. its particularly good if theres an admixture of disdain in the big players attitude because that often misleads them. for example after steve wozniak built the computer that became the apple i he felt obliged to give his thenemployer hewlettpackard the option to produce it. fortunately for him they turned it down and one of the reasons they did was that it used a tv for a monitor which seemed intolerably dclass to a highend hardware company like hp was at the time. 17are there groups of scruffy but sophisticated users like the early microcomputer hobbyists that are currently being ignored by the big players a startup with its sights set on bigger things can often capture a small market easily by expending an effort that wouldnt be justified by that market alone.similarly since the most successful startups generally ride some wave bigger than themselves it could be a good trick to look for waves and ask how one could benefit from them. the prices of gene sequencing and 3d printing are both experiencing moores lawlike declines. what new things will we be able to do in the new world well have in a few years what are we unconsciously ruling out as impossible that will soon be possibleorganicbut talking about looking explicitly for waves makes it clear that such recipes are plan b for getting startup ideas. looking for waves is essentially a way to simulate the organic method. if youre at the leading edge of some rapidly changing field you dont have to look for waves you are the wave.finding startup ideas is a subtle business and thats why most people who try fail so miserably. it doesnt work well simply to try to think of startup ideas. if you do that you get bad ones that sound dangerously plausible. the best approach is more indirect if you have the right sort of background good startup ideas will seem obvious to you. but even then not immediately. it takes time to come across situations where you notice something missing. and often these gaps wont seem to be ideas for companies just things that would be interesting to build. which is why its good to have the time and the inclination to build things just because theyre interesting.live in the future and build what seems interesting. strange as it sounds thats the real recipe.notes1 this form of bad idea has been around as long as the web. it was common in the 1990s except then people who had it used to say they were going to create a portal for x instead of a social network for x. structurally the idea is stone soup you post a sign saying this is the place for people interested in x and all those people show up and you make money from them. what lures founders into this sort of idea are statistics about the millions of people who might be interested in each type of x. what they forget is that any given person might have 20 affinities by this standard and no one is going to visit 20 different communities regularly.2 im not saying incidentally that i know for sure a social network for pet owners is a bad idea. i know its a bad idea the way i know randomly generated dna would not produce a viable organism. the set of plausible sounding startup ideas is many times larger than the set of good ones and many of the good ones dont even sound that plausible. so if all you know about a startup idea is that it sounds plausible you have to assume its bad.3 more precisely the users need has to give them sufficient activation energy to start using whatever you make which can vary a lot. for example the activation energy for enterprise software sold through traditional channels is very high so youd have to be a lot better to get users to switch. whereas the activation energy required to switch to a new search engine is low. which in turn is why search engines are so much better than enterprise software.4 this gets harder as you get older. while the space of ideas doesnt have dangerous local maxima the space of careers does. there are fairly high walls between most of the paths people take through life and the older you get the higher the walls become.5 it was also obvious to us that the web was going to be a big deal. few nonprogrammers grasped that in 1995 but the programmers had seen what guis had done for desktop computers.6 maybe it would work to have this second self keep a journal and each night to make a brief entry listing the gaps and anomalies youd noticed that day. not startup ideas just the raw gaps and anomalies.7 sam altman points out that taking time to come up with an idea is not merely a better strategy in an absolute sense but also like an undervalued stock in that so few founders do it.theres comparatively little competition for the best ideas because few founders are willing to put in the time required to notice them. whereas there is a great deal of competition for mediocre ideas because when people make up startup ideas they tend to make up the same ones.8 for the computer hardware and software companies summer jobs are the first phase of the recruiting funnel. but if youre good you can skip the first phase. if youre good youll have no trouble getting hired by these companies when you graduate regardless of how you spent your summers.9 the empirical evidence suggests that if colleges want to help their students start startups the best thing they can do is leave them alone in the right way.10 im speaking here of it startups in biotech things are different.11 this is an instance of a more general rule focus on users not competitors. the most important information about competitors is what you learn via users anyway.12 in practice most successful startups have elements of both. and you can describe each strategy in terms of the other by adjusting the boundaries of what you call the market. but its useful to consider these two ideas separately.13 i almost hesitate to raise that point though. startups are businesses the point of a business is to make money and with that additional constraint you cant expect youll be able to spend all your time working on what interests you most.14 the need has to be a strong one. you can retroactively describe any madeup idea as something you need. but do you really need that recipe site or local event aggregator as much as drew houston needed dropbox or brian chesky and joe gebbia needed airbnbquite often at yc i find myself asking founders would you use this thing yourself if you hadnt written it and youd be surprised how often the answer is no.15 paul buchheit points out that trying to sell something bad can be a source of better ideasthe best technique ive found for dealing with yc companies that have bad ideas is to tell them to go sell the product asap before wasting time building it. not only do they learn that nobody wants what they are building they very often come back with a real idea that they discovered in the process of trying to sell the bad idea.16 heres a recipe that might produce the next facebook if youre college students. if you have a connection to one of the more powerful sororities at your school approach the queen bees thereof and offer to be their personal it consultants building anything they could imagine needing in their social lives that didnt already exist. anything that got built this way would be very promising because such users are not just the most demanding but also the perfect point to spread from.i have no idea whether this would work.17 and the reason it used a tv for a monitor is that steve wozniak started out by solving his own problems. he like most of his peers couldnt afford a monitor.

the most valuable insights are both general and surprising. f  ma for example. but general and surprising is a hard combination to achieve. that territory tends to be picked clean precisely because those insights are so valuable.ordinarily the best that people can do is one without the other either surprising without being general e.g. gossip or general without being surprising e.g. platitudes.where things get interesting is the moderately valuable insights. you get those from small additions of whichever quality was missing. the more common case is a small addition of generality a piece of gossip thats more than just gossip because it teaches something interesting about the world. but another less common approach is to focus on the most general ideas and see if you can find something new to say about them. because these start out so general you only need a small delta of novelty to produce a useful insight.a small delta of novelty is all youll be able to get most of the time. which means if you take this route your ideas will seem a lot like ones that already exist. sometimes youll find youve merely rediscovered an idea that did already exist. but dont be discouraged. remember the huge multiplier that kicks in when you do manage to think of something even a little new.corollary the more general the ideas youre talking about the less you should worry about repeating yourself. if you write enough its inevitable you will. your brain is much the same from year to year and so are the stimuli that hit it. i feel slightly bad when i find ive said something close to what ive said before as if i were plagiarizing myself. but rationally one shouldnt. you wont say something exactly the same way the second time and that variation increases the chance youll get that tiny but critical delta of novelty.and of course ideas beget ideas. that sounds familiar. an idea with a small amount of novelty could lead to one with more. but only if you keep going. so its doubly important not to let yourself be discouraged by people who say theres not much new about something youve discovered. not much new is a real achievement when youre talking about the most general ideas.its not true that theres nothing new under the sun. there are some domains where theres almost nothing new. but theres a big difference between nothing and almost nothing when its multiplied by the area under the sun.

after barely changing at all for decades the startup funding business is now in what could at least by comparison be called turmoil. at y combinator weve seen dramatic changes in the funding environment for startups. fortunately one of them is much higher valuations.the trends weve been seeing are probably not ycspecific. i wish i could say they were but the main cause is probably just that we see trends firstpartly because the startups we fund are very plugged into the valley and are quick to take advantage of anything new and partly because we fund so many that we have enough data points to see patterns clearly.what were seeing now everyones probably going to be seeing in the next couple years. so im going to explain what were seeing and what that will mean for you if you try to raise money.superangelslet me start by describing what the world of startup funding used to look like. there used to be two sharply differentiated types of investors angels and venture capitalists. angels are individual rich people who invest small amounts of their own money while vcs are employees of funds that invest large amounts of other peoples.for decades there were just those two types of investors but now a third type has appeared halfway between them the socalled superangels. 1 and vcs have been provoked by their arrival into making a lot of angelstyle investments themselves. so the previously sharp line between angels and vcs has become hopelessly blurred.there used to be a no mans land between angels and vcs. angels would invest 20k to 50k apiece and vcs usually a million or more. so an angel round meant a collection of angel investments that combined to maybe 200k and a vc round meant a series a round in which a single vc fund or occasionally two invested 15 million.the no mans land between angels and vcs was a very inconvenient one for startups because it coincided with the amount many wanted to raise. most startups coming out of demo day wanted to raise around 400k. but it was a pain to stitch together that much out of angel investments and most vcs werent interested in investments so small. thats the fundamental reason the superangels have appeared. theyre responding to the market.the arrival of a new type of investor is big news for startups because there used to be only two and they rarely competed with one another. superangels compete with both angels and vcs. thats going to change the rules about how to raise money. i dont know yet what the new rules will be but it looks like most of the changes will be for the better.a superangel has some of the qualities of an angel and some of the qualities of a vc. theyre usually individuals like angels. in fact many of the current superangels were initially angels of the classic type. but like vcs they invest other peoples money. this allows them to invest larger amounts than angels a typical superangel investment is currently about 100k. they make investment decisions quickly like angels. and they make a lot more investments per partner than vcsup to 10 times as many.the fact that superangels invest other peoples money makes them doubly alarming to vcs. they dont just compete for startups they also compete for investors. what superangels really are is a new form of fastmoving lightweight vc fund. and those of us in the technology world know what usually happens when something comes along that can be described in terms like that. usually its the replacement.will it be as of now few of the startups that take money from superangels are ruling out taking vc money. theyre just postponing it. but thats still a problem for vcs. some of the startups that postpone raising vc money may do so well on the angel money they raise that they never bother to raise more. and those who do raise vc rounds will be able to get higher valuations when they do. if the best startups get 10x higher valuations when they raise series a rounds that would cut vcs returns from winners at least tenfold. 2so i think vc funds are seriously threatened by the superangels. but one thing that may save them to some extent is the uneven distribution of startup outcomes practically all the returns are concentrated in a few big successes. the expected value of a startup is the percentage chance its google. so to the extent that winning is a matter of absolute returns the superangels could win practically all the battles for individual startups and yet lose the war if they merely failed to get those few big winners. and theres a chance that could happen because the top vc funds have better brands and can also do more for their portfolio companies. 3because superangels make more investments per partner they have less partner per investment. they cant pay as much attention to you as a vc on your board could. how much is that extra attention worth it will vary enormously from one partner to another. theres no consensus yet in the general case. so for now this is something startups are deciding individually.till now vcs claims about how much value they added were sort of like the governments. maybe they made you feel better but you had no choice in the matter if you needed money on the scale only vcs could supply. now that vcs have competitors thats going to put a market price on the help they offer. the interesting thing is no one knows yet what it will be.do startups that want to get really big need the sort of advice and connections only the top vcs can supply or would superangel money do just as well the vcs will say you need them and the superangels will say you dont. but the truth is no one knows yet not even the vcs and superangels themselves. all the superangels know is that their new model seems promising enough to be worth trying and all the vcs know is that it seems promising enough to worry about.roundswhatever the outcome the conflict between vcs and superangels is good news for founders. and not just for the obvious reason that more competition for deals means better terms. the whole shape of deals is changing.one of the biggest differences between angels and vcs is the amount of your company they want. vcs want a lot. in a series a round they want a third of your company if they can get it. they dont care much how much they pay for it but they want a lot because the number of series a investments they can do is so small. in a traditional series a investment at least one partner from the vc fund takes a seat on your board. 4 since board seats last about 5 years and each partner cant handle more than about 10 at once that means a vc fund can only do about 2 series a deals per partner per year. and that means they need to get as much of the company as they can in each one. youd have to be a very promising startup indeed to get a vc to use up one of his 10 board seats for only a few percent of you.since angels generally dont take board seats they dont have this constraint. theyre happy to buy only a few percent of you. and although the superangels are in most respects mini vc funds theyve retained this critical property of angels. they dont take board seats so they dont need a big percentage of your company.though that means youll get correspondingly less attention from them its good news in other respects. founders never really liked giving up as much equity as vcs wanted. it was a lot of the company to give up in one shot. most founders doing series a deals would prefer to take half as much money for half as much stock and then see what valuation they could get for the second half of the stock after using the first half of the money to increase its value. but vcs never offered that option.now startups have another alternative. now its easy to raise angel rounds about half the size of series a rounds. many of the startups we fund are taking this route and i predict that will be true of startups in general.a typical big angel round might be 600k on a convertible note with a valuation cap of 4 million premoney. meaning that when the note converts into stock in a later round or upon acquisition the investors in that round will get .6  4.6 or 13 of the company. thats a lot less than the 30 to 40 of the company you usually give up in a series a round if you do it so early. 5but the advantage of these mediumsized rounds is not just that they cause less dilution. you also lose less control. after an angel round the founders almost always still have control of the company whereas after a series a round they often dont. the traditional board structure after a series a round is two founders two vcs and a supposedly neutral fifth person. plus series a terms usually give the investors a veto over various kinds of important decisions including selling the company. founders usually have a lot of de facto control after a series a as long as things are going well. but thats not the same as just being able to do what you want like you could before.a third and quite significant advantage of angel rounds is that theyre less stressful to raise. raising a traditional series a round has in the past taken weeks if not months. when a vc firm can only do 2 deals per partner per year theyre careful about which they do. to get a traditional series a round you have to go through a series of meetings culminating in a full partner meeting where the firm as a whole says yes or no. thats the really scary part for founders not just that series a rounds take so long but at the end of this long process the vcs might still say no. the chance of getting rejected after the full partner meeting averages about 25. at some firms its over 50.fortunately for founders vcs have been getting a lot faster. nowadays valley vcs are more likely to take 2 weeks than 2 months. but theyre still not as fast as angels and superangels the most decisive of whom sometimes decide in hours.raising an angel round is not only quicker but you get feedback as it progresses. an angel round is not an all or nothing thing like a series a. its composed of multiple investors with varying degrees of seriousness ranging from the upstanding ones who commit unequivocally to the jerks who give you lines like come back to me to fill out the round. you usually start collecting money from the most committed investors and work your way out toward the ambivalent ones whose interest increases as the round fills up.but at each point you know how youre doing. if investors turn cold you may have to raise less but when investors in an angel round turn cold the process at least degrades gracefully instead of blowing up in your face and leaving you with nothing as happens if you get rejected by a vc fund after a full partner meeting. whereas if investors seem hot you can not only close the round faster but now that convertible notes are becoming the norm actually raise the price to reflect demand.valuationhowever the vcs have a weapon they can use against the superangels and they have started to use it. vcs have started making angelsized investments too. the term angel round doesnt mean that all the investors in it are angels it just describes the structure of the round. increasingly the participants include vcs making investments of a hundred thousand or two. and when vcs invest in angel rounds they can do things that superangels dont like. vcs are quite valuationinsensitive in angel roundspartly because they are in general and partly because they dont care that much about the returns on angel rounds which they still view mostly as a way to recruit startups for series a rounds later. so vcs who invest in angel rounds can blow up the valuations for angels and superangels who invest in them. 6some superangels seem to care about valuations. several turned down ycfunded startups after demo day because their valuations were too high. this was not a problem for the startups by definition a high valuation means enough investors were willing to accept it. but it was mysterious to me that the superangels would quibble about valuations. did they not understand that the big returns come from a few big successes and that it therefore mattered far more which startups you picked than how much you paid for themafter thinking about it for a while and observing certain other signs i have a theory that explains why the superangels may be smarter than they seem. it would make sense for superangels to want low valuations if theyre hoping to invest in startups that get bought early. if youre hoping to hit the next google you shouldnt care if the valuation is 20 million. but if youre looking for companies that are going to get bought for 30 million you care. if you invest at 20 and the company gets bought for 30 you only get 1.5x. you might as well buy apple.so if some of the superangels were looking for companies that could get acquired quickly that would explain why theyd care about valuations. but why would they be looking for those because depending on the meaning of quickly it could actually be very profitable. a company that gets acquired for 30 million is a failure to a vc but it could be a 10x return for an angel and moreover a quick 10x return. rate of return is what matters in investingnot the multiple you get but the multiple per year. if a superangel gets 10x in one year thats a higher rate of return than a vc could ever hope to get from a company that took 6 years to go public. to get the same rate of return the vc would have to get a multiple of 106one million x. even google didnt come close to that.so i think at least some superangels are looking for companies that will get bought. thats the only rational explanation for focusing on getting the right valuations instead of the right companies. and if so theyll be different to deal with than vcs. theyll be tougher on valuations but more accommodating if you want to sell early.prognosiswho will win the superangels or the vcs i think the answer to that is some of each. theyll each become more like one another. the superangels will start to invest larger amounts and the vcs will gradually figure out ways to make more smaller investments faster. a decade from now the players will be hard to tell apart and there will probably be survivors from each group.what does that mean for founders one thing it means is that the high valuations startups are presently getting may not last forever. to the extent that valuations are being driven up by priceinsensitive vcs theyll fall again if vcs become more like superangels and start to become more miserly about valuations. fortunately if this does happen it will take years.the short term forecast is more competition between investors which is good news for you. the superangels will try to undermine the vcs by acting faster and the vcs will try to undermine the superangels by driving up valuations. which for founders will result in the perfect combination funding rounds that close fast with high valuations.but remember that to get that combination your startup will have to appeal to both superangels and vcs. if you dont seem like you have the potential to go public you wont be able to use vcs to drive up the valuation of an angel round.there is a danger of having vcs in an angel round the socalled signalling risk. if vcs are only doing it in the hope of investing more later what happens if they dont thats a signal to everyone else that they think youre lame.how much should you worry about that the seriousness of signalling risk depends on how far along you are. if by the next time you need to raise money you have graphs showing rising revenue or traffic month after month you dont have to worry about any signals your existing investors are sending. your results will speak for themselves. 7whereas if the next time you need to raise money you wont yet have concrete results you may need to think more about the message your investors might send if they dont invest more. im not sure yet how much you have to worry because this whole phenomenon of vcs doing angel investments is so new. but my instincts tell me you dont have to worry much. signalling risk smells like one of those things founders worry about thats not a real problem. as a rule the only thing that can kill a good startup is the startup itself. startups hurt themselves way more often than competitors hurt them for example. i suspect signalling risk is in this category too.one thing ycfunded startups have been doing to mitigate the risk of taking money from vcs in angel rounds is not to take too much from any one vc. maybe that will help if you have the luxury of turning down money.fortunately more and more startups will. after decades of competition that could best be described as intramural the startup funding business is finally getting some real competition. that should last several years at least and maybe a lot longer. unless theres some huge market crash the next couple years are going to be a good time for startups to raise money. and thats exciting because it means lots more startups will happen.notes1 ive also heard them called minivcs and microvcs. i dont know which name will stick.there were a couple predecessors. ron conway had angel funds starting in the 1990s and in some ways first round capital is closer to a superangel than a vc fund.2 it wouldnt cut their overall returns tenfold because investing later would probably a cause them to lose less on investments that failed and b not allow them to get as large a percentage of startups as they do now. so its hard to predict precisely what would happen to their returns.3 the brand of an investor derives mostly from the success of their portfolio companies. the top vcs thus have a big brand advantage over the superangels. they could make it selfperpetuating if they used it to get all the best new startups. but i dont think theyll be able to. to get all the best startups you have to do more than make them want you. you also have to want them you have to recognize them when you see them and thats much harder. superangels will snap up stars that vcs miss. and that will cause the brand gap between the top vcs and the superangels gradually to erode.4 though in a traditional series a round vcs put two partners on your board there are signs now that vcs may begin to conserve board seats by switching to what used to be considered an angelround board consisting of two founders and one vc. which is also to the founders advantage if it means they still control the company.5 in a series a round you usually have to give up more than the actual amount of stock the vcs buy because they insist you dilute yourselves to set aside an option pool as well. i predict this practice will gradually disappear though.6 the best thing for founders if they can get it is a convertible note with no valuation cap at all. in that case the money invested in the angel round just converts into stock at the valuation of the next round no matter how large. angels and superangels tend not to like uncapped notes. they have no idea how much of the company theyre buying. if the company does well and the valuation of the next round is high they may end up with only a sliver of it. so by agreeing to uncapped notes vcs who dont care about valuations in angel rounds can make offers that superangels hate to match.7 obviously signalling risk is also not a problem if youll never need to raise more money. but startups are often mistaken about that.

ive done several types of work over the years but i dont know another as counterintuitive as startup investing.the two most important things to understand about startup investing as a business are 1 that effectively all the returns are concentrated in a few big winners and 2 that the best ideas look initially like bad ideas.the first rule i knew intellectually but didnt really grasp till it happened to us. the total value of the companies weve funded is around 10 billion give or take a few. but just two companies dropbox and airbnb account for about three quarters of it.in startups the big winners are big to a degree that violates our expectations about variation. i dont know whether these expectations are innate or learned but whatever the cause we are just not prepared for the 1000x variation in outcomes that one finds in startup investing.that yields all sorts of strange consequences. for example in purely financial terms there is probably at most one company in each yc batch that will have a significant effect on our returns and the rest are just a cost of doing business. 1 i havent really assimilated that fact partly because its so counterintuitive and partly because were not doing this just for financial reasons yc would be a pretty lonely place if we only had one company per batch. and yet its true.to succeed in a domain that violates your intuitions you need to be able to turn them off the way a pilot does when flying through clouds. 2 you need to do what you know intellectually to be right even though it feels wrong.its a constant battle for us. its hard to make ourselves take enough risks. when you interview a startup and think they seem likely to succeed its hard not to fund them. and yet financially at least there is only one kind of success theyre either going to be one of the really big winners or not and if not it doesnt matter whether you fund them because even if they succeed the effect on your returns will be insignificant. in the same day of interviews you might meet some smart 19 year olds who arent even sure what they want to work on. their chances of succeeding seem small. but again its not their chances of succeeding that matter but their chances of succeeding really big. the probability that any group will succeed really big is microscopically small but the probability that those 19 year olds will might be higher than that of the other safer group.the probability that a startup will make it big is not simply a constant fraction of the probability that they will succeed at all. if it were you could fund everyone who seemed likely to succeed at all and youd get that fraction of big hits. unfortunately picking winners is harder than that. you have to ignore the elephant in front of you the likelihood theyll succeed and focus instead on the separate and almost invisibly intangible question of whether theyll succeed really big.harderthats made harder by the fact that the best startup ideas seem at first like bad ideas. ive written about this before if a good idea were obviously good someone else would already have done it. so the most successful founders tend to work on ideas that few beside them realize are good. which is not that far from a description of insanity till you reach the point where you see results.the first time peter thiel spoke at yc he drew a venn diagram that illustrates the situation perfectly. he drew two intersecting circles one labelled seems like a bad idea and the other is a good idea. the intersection is the sweet spot for startups.this concept is a simple one and yet seeing it as a venn diagram is illuminating. it reminds you that there is an intersectionthat there are good ideas that seem bad. it also reminds you that the vast majority of ideas that seem bad are bad.the fact that the best ideas seem like bad ideas makes it even harder to recognize the big winners. it means the probability of a startup making it really big is not merely not a constant fraction of the probability that it will succeed but that the startups with a high probability of the former will seem to have a disproportionately low probability of the latter.history tends to get rewritten by big successes so that in retrospect it seems obvious they were going to make it big. for that reason one of my most valuable memories is how lame facebook sounded to me when i first heard about it. a site for college students to waste time it seemed the perfect bad idea a site 1 for a niche market 2 with no money 3 to do something that didnt matter.one could have described microsoft and apple in exactly the same terms. 3harder stillwait it gets worse. you not only have to solve this hard problem but you have to do it with no indication of whether youre succeeding. when you pick a big winner you wont know it for two years.meanwhile the one thing you can measure is dangerously misleading. the one thing we can track precisely is how well the startups in each batch do at fundraising after demo day. but we know thats the wrong metric. theres no correlation between the percentage of startups that raise money and the metric that does matter financially whether that batch of startups contains a big winner or not.except an inverse one. thats the scary thing fundraising is not merely a useless metric but positively misleading. were in a business where we need to pick unpromisinglooking outliers and the huge scale of the successes means we can afford to spread our net very widely. the big winners could generate 10000x returns. that means for each big winner we could pick a thousand companies that returned nothing and still end up 10x ahead.if we ever got to the point where 100 of the startups we funded were able to raise money after demo day it would almost certainly mean we were being too conservative. 4it takes a conscious effort not to do that too. after 15 cycles of preparing startups for investors and then watching how they do i can now look at a group were interviewing through demo day investors eyes. but those are the wrong eyes to look throughwe can afford to take at least 10x as much risk as demo day investors. and since risk is usually proportionate to reward if you can afford to take more risk you should. what would it mean to take 10x more risk than demo day investors wed have to be willing to fund 10x more startups than they would. which means that even if were generous to ourselves and assume that yc can on average triple a startups expected value wed be taking the right amount of risk if only 30 of the startups were able to raise significant funding after demo day.i dont know what fraction of them currently raise more after demo day. i deliberately avoid calculating that number because if you start measuring something you start optimizing it and i know its the wrong thing to optimize. 5 but the percentage is certainly way over 30. and frankly the thought of a 30 success rate at fundraising makes my stomach clench. a demo day where only 30 of the startups were fundable would be a shambles. everyone would agree that yc had jumped the shark. we ourselves would feel that yc had jumped the shark. and yet wed all be wrong.for better or worse thats never going to be more than a thought experiment. we could never stand it. how about that for counterintuitive i can lay out what i know to be the right thing to do and still not do it. i can make up all sorts of plausible justifications. it would hurt ycs brand at least among the innumerate if we invested in huge numbers of risky startups that flamed out. it might dilute the value of the alumni network. perhaps most convincingly it would be demoralizing for us to be up to our chins in failure all the time. but i know the real reason were so conservative is that we just havent assimilated the fact of 1000x variation in returns.well probably never be able to bring ourselves to take risks proportionate to the returns in this business. the best we can hope for is that when we interview a group and find ourselves thinking they seem like good founders but what are investors going to think of this crazy idea well continue to be able to say who cares what investors think thats what we thought about airbnb and if we want to fund more airbnbs we have to stay good at thinking it.notes1 im not saying that the big winners are all that matters just that theyre all that matters financially for investors. since were not doing yc mainly for financial reasons the big winners arent all that matters to us. were delighted to have funded reddit for example. even though we made comparatively little from it reddit has had a big effect on the world and it introduced us to steve huffman and alexis ohanian both of whom have become good friends.nor do we push founders to try to become one of the big winners if they dont want to. we didnt swing for the fences in our own startup viaweb which was acquired for 50 million and it would feel pretty bogus to press founders to do something we didnt do. our rule is that its up to the founders. some want to take over the world and some just want that first few million. but we invest in so many companies that we dont have to sweat any one outcome. in fact we dont have to sweat whether startups have exits at all. the biggest exits are the only ones that matter financially and those are guaranteed in the sense that if a company becomes big enough a market for its shares will inevitably arise. since the remaining outcomes dont have a significant effect on returns its cool with us if the founders want to sell early for a small amount or grow slowly and never sell i.e. become a socalled lifestyle business or even shut the company down. were sometimes disappointed when a startup we had high hopes for doesnt do well but this disappointment is mostly the ordinary variety that anyone feels when that happens.2 without visual cues e.g. the horizon you cant distinguish between gravity and acceleration. which means if youre flying through clouds you cant tell what the attitude of the aircraft is. you could feel like youre flying straight and level while in fact youre descending in a spiral. the solution is to ignore what your body is telling you and listen only to your instruments. but it turns out to be very hard to ignore what your body is telling you. every pilot knows about this problem and yet it is still a leading cause of accidents.3 not all big hits follow this pattern though. the reason google seemed a bad idea was that there were already lots of search engines and there didnt seem to be room for another.4 a startups success at fundraising is a function of two things what theyre selling and how good they are at selling it. and while we can teach startups a lot about how to appeal to investors even the most convincing pitch cant sell an idea that investors dont like. i was genuinely worried that airbnb for example would not be able to raise money after demo day. i couldnt convince fred wilson to fund them. they might not have raised money at all but for the coincidence that greg mcadoo our contact at sequoia was one of a handful of vcs who understood the vacation rental business having spent much of the previous two years investigating it.5 i calculated it once for the last batch before a consortium of investors started offering investment automatically to every startup we funded summer 2010. at the time it was 94 33 of 35 companies that tried to raise money succeeded and one didnt try because they were already profitable. presumably its lower now because of that investment in the old days it was raise after demo day or die.

i was thinking recently how inconvenient it was not to have a general term for iphones ipads and the corresponding things running android. the closest to a general term seems to be mobile devices but that a applies to any mobile phone and b doesnt really capture whats distinctive about the ipad.after a few seconds it struck me that what well end up calling these things is tablets. the only reason we even consider calling them mobile devices is that the iphone preceded the ipad. if the ipad had come first we wouldnt think of the iphone as a phone wed think of it as a tablet small enough to hold up to your ear.the iphone isnt so much a phone as a replacement for a phone. thats an important distinction because its an early instance of what will become a common pattern. many if not most of the specialpurpose objects around us are going to be replaced by apps running on tablets.this is already clear in cases like gpses music players and cameras. but i think it will surprise people how many things are going to get replaced. we funded one startup thats replacing keys. the fact that you can change font sizes easily means the ipad effectively replaces reading glasses. i wouldnt be surprised if by playing some clever tricks with the accelerometer you could even replace the bathroom scale.the advantages of doing things in software on a single device are so great that everything that can get turned into software will. so for the next couple years a good recipe for startups will be to look around you for things that people havent realized yet can be made unnecessary by a tablet app.in 1938 buckminster fuller coined the term ephemeralization to describe the increasing tendency of physical machinery to be replaced by what we would now call software. the reason tablets are going to take over the world is not just that steve jobs and co are industrial design wizards but because they have this force behind them. the iphone and the ipad have effectively drilled a hole that will allow ephemeralization to flow into a lot of new areas. no one who has studied the history of technology would want to underestimate the power of that force.i worry about the power apple could have with this force behind them. i dont want to see another era of client monoculture like the microsoft one in the 80s and 90s. but if ephemeralization is one of the main forces driving the spread of tablets that suggests a way to compete with apple be a better platform for it.it has turned out to be a great thing that apple tablets have accelerometers in them. developers have used the accelerometer in ways apple could never have imagined. thats the nature of platforms. the more versatile the tool the less you can predict how people will use it. so tablet makers should be thinking what else can we put in there not merely hardware but software too. what else can we give developers access to give hackers an inch and theyll take you a mile.

heres a simple trick for getting more people to read what you write write in spoken language.something comes over most people when they start writing. they write in a different language than theyd use if they were talking to a friend. the sentence structure and even the words are different. no one uses pen as a verb in spoken english. youd feel like an idiot using pen instead of write in a conversation with a friend.the last straw for me was a sentence i read a couple days agothe mercurial spaniard himself declared after altamira all is decadence.its from neil olivers a history of ancient britain. i feel bad making an example of this book because its no worse than lots of others. but just imagine calling picasso the mercurial spaniard when talking to a friend. even one sentence of this would raise eyebrows in conversation. and yet people write whole books of it.ok so written and spoken language are different. does that make written language worseif you want people to read and understand what you write yes. written language is more complex which makes it more work to read. its also more formal and distant which gives the readers attention permission to drift. but perhaps worst of all the complex sentences and fancy words give you the writer the false impression that youre saying more than you actually are.you dont need complex sentences to express complex ideas. when specialists in some abstruse topic talk to one another about ideas in their field they dont use sentences any more complex than they do when talking about what to have for lunch. they use different words certainly. but even those they use no more than necessary. and in my experience the harder the subject the more informally experts speak. partly i think because they have less to prove and partly because the harder the ideas youre talking about the less you can afford to let language get in the way.informal language is the athletic clothing of ideas.im not saying spoken language always works best. poetry is as much music as text so you can say things you wouldnt say in conversation. and there are a handful of writers who can get away with using fancy language in prose. and then of course there are cases where writers dont want to make it easy to understand what theyre sayingin corporate announcements of bad news for example or at the more bogus end of the humanities. but for nearly everyone else spoken language is better.it seems to be hard for most people to write in spoken language. so perhaps the best solution is to write your first draft the way you usually would then afterward look at each sentence and ask is this the way id say this if i were talking to a friend if it isnt imagine what you would say and use that instead. after a while this filter will start to operate as you write. when you write something you wouldnt say youll hear the clank as it hits the page.before i publish a new essay i read it out loud and fix everything that doesnt sound like conversation. i even fix bits that are phonetically awkward i dont know if thats necessary but it doesnt cost much.this trick may not always be enough. ive seen writing so far removed from spoken language that it couldnt be fixed sentence by sentence. for cases like that theres a more drastic solution. after writing the first draft try explaining to a friend what you just wrote. then replace the draft with what you said to your friend.people often tell me how much my essays sound like me talking. the fact that this seems worthy of comment shows how rarely people manage to write in spoken language. otherwise everyones writing would sound like them talking.if you simply manage to write in spoken language youll be ahead of 95 of writers. and its so easy to do just dont let a sentence through unless its the way youd say it to a friend.

american technology companies want the government to make immigration easier because they say they cant find enough programmers in the us. antiimmigration people say that instead of letting foreigners take these jobs we should train more americans to be programmers. whos rightthe technology companies are right. what the antiimmigration people dont understand is that there is a huge variation in ability between competent programmers and exceptional ones and while you can train people to be competent you cant train them to be exceptional. exceptional programmers have an aptitude for and interest in programming that is not merely the product of training. 1the us has less than 5 of the worlds population. which means if the qualities that make someone a great programmer are evenly distributed 95 of great programmers are born outside the us.the antiimmigration people have to invent some explanation to account for all the effort technology companies have expended trying to make immigration easier. so they claim its because they want to drive down salaries. but if you talk to startups you find practically every one over a certain size has gone through legal contortions to get programmers into the us where they then paid them the same as theyd have paid an american. why would they go to extra trouble to get programmers for the same price the only explanation is that theyre telling the truth there are just not enough great programmers to go around. 2i asked the ceo of a startup with about 70 programmers how many more hed hire if he could get all the great programmers he wanted. he said wed hire 30 tomorrow morning. and this is one of the hot startups that always win recruiting battles. its the same all over silicon valley. startups are that constrained for talent.it would be great if more americans were trained as programmers but no amount of training can flip a ratio as overwhelming as 95 to 5. especially since programmers are being trained in other countries too. barring some cataclysm it will always be true that most great programmers are born outside the us. it will always be true that most people who are great at anything are born outside the us. 3exceptional performance implies immigration. a country with only a few percent of the worlds population will be exceptional in some field only if there are a lot of immigrants working in it.but this whole discussion has taken something for granted that if we let more great programmers into the us theyll want to come. thats true now and we dont realize how lucky we are that it is. if we want to keep this option open the best way to do it is to take advantage of it the more of the worlds great programmers are here the more the rest will want to come here.and if we dont the us could be seriously fucked. i realize thats strong language but the people dithering about this dont seem to realize the power of the forces at work here. technology gives the best programmers huge leverage. the world market in programmers seems to be becoming dramatically more liquid. and since good people like good colleagues that means the best programmers could collect in just a few hubs. maybe mostly in one hub.what if most of the great programmers collected in one hub and it wasnt here that scenario may seem unlikely now but it wont be if things change as much in the next 50 years as they did in the last 50.we have the potential to ensure that the us remains a technology superpower just by letting in a few thousand great programmers a year. what a colossal mistake it would be to let that opportunity slip. it could easily be the defining mistake this generation of american politicians later become famous for. and unlike other potential mistakes on that scale it costs nothing to fix.so please get on with it.notes1 how much better is a great programmer than an ordinary one so much better that you cant even measure the difference directly. a great programmer doesnt merely do the same work faster. a great programmer will invent things an ordinary programmer would never even think of. this doesnt mean a great programmer is infinitely more valuable because any invention has a finite market value. but its easy to imagine cases where a great programmer might invent things worth 100x or even 1000x an average programmers salary.2 there are a handful of consulting firms that rent out big pools of foreign programmers they bring in on h1b visas. by all means crack down on these. it should be easy to write legislation that distinguishes them because they are so different from technology companies. but it is dishonest of the antiimmigration people to claim that companies like google and facebook are driven by the same motives. an influx of inexpensive but mediocre programmers is the last thing theyd want it would destroy them.3 though this essay talks about programmers the group of people we need to import is broader ranging from designers to programmers to electrical engineers. the best one could do as a general term might be digital talent. it seemed better to make the argument a little too narrow than to confuse everyone with a neologism.thanks to sam altman john collison patrick collison jessica livingston geoff ralston fred wilson and qasar younis for reading drafts of this.

there are some kinds of work that you cant do well without thinking differently from your peers. to be a successful scientist for example its not enough just to be correct. your ideas have to be both correct and novel. you cant publish papers saying things other people already know. you need to say things no one else has realized yet.the same is true for investors. its not enough for a public market investor to predict correctly how a company will do. if a lot of other people make the same prediction the stock price will already reflect it and theres no room to make money. the only valuable insights are the ones most other investors dont share.you see this pattern with startup founders too. you dont want to start a startup to do something that everyone agrees is a good idea or there will already be other companies doing it. you have to do something that sounds to most other people like a bad idea but that you know isnt  like writing software for a tiny computer used by a few thousand hobbyists or starting a site to let people rent airbeds on strangers floors.ditto for essayists. an essay that told people things they already knew would be boring. you have to tell them something new.but this pattern isnt universal. in fact it doesnt hold for most kinds of work. in most kinds of work  to be an administrator for example  all you need is the first half. all you need is to be right. its not essential that everyone else be wrong.theres room for a little novelty in most kinds of work but in practice theres a fairly sharp distinction between the kinds of work where its essential to be independentminded and the kinds where its not.i wish someone had told me about this distinction when i was a kid because its one of the most important things to think about when youre deciding what kind of work you want to do. do you want to do the kind of work where you can only win by thinking differently from everyone else i suspect most peoples unconscious mind will answer that question before their conscious mind has a chance to. i know mine does.independentmindedness seems to be more a matter of nature than nurture. which means if you pick the wrong type of work youre going to be unhappy. if youre naturally independentminded youre going to find it frustrating to be a middle manager. and if youre naturally conventionalminded youre going to be sailing into a headwind if you try to do original research.one difficulty here though is that people are often mistaken about where they fall on the spectrum from conventional to independentminded. conventionalminded people dont like to think of themselves as conventionalminded. and in any case it genuinely feels to them as if they make up their own minds about everything. its just a coincidence that their beliefs are identical to their peers. and the independentminded meanwhile are often unaware how different their ideas are from conventional ones at least till they state them publicly. 1by the time they reach adulthood most people know roughly how smart they are in the narrow sense of ability to solve preset problems because theyre constantly being tested and ranked according to it. but schools generally ignore independentmindedness except to the extent they try to suppress it. so we dont get anything like the same kind of feedback about how independentminded we are.there may even be a phenomenon like dunningkruger at work where the most conventionalminded people are confident that theyre independentminded while the genuinely independentminded worry they might not be independentminded enough.can you make yourself more independentminded i think so. this quality may be largely inborn but there seem to be ways to magnify it or at least not to suppress it.one of the most effective techniques is one practiced unintentionally by most nerds simply to be less aware what conventional beliefs are. its hard to be a conformist if you dont know what youre supposed to conform to. though again it may be that such people already are independentminded. a conventionalminded person would probably feel anxious not knowing what other people thought and make more effort to find out.it matters a lot who you surround yourself with. if youre surrounded by conventionalminded people it will constrain which ideas you can express and that in turn will constrain which ideas you have. but if you surround yourself with independentminded people youll have the opposite experience hearing other people say surprising things will encourage you to and to think of more.because the independentminded find it uncomfortable to be surrounded by conventionalminded people they tend to selfsegregate once they have a chance to. the problem with high school is that they havent yet had a chance to. plus high school tends to be an inwardlooking little world whose inhabitants lack confidence both of which magnify the forces of conformism. so high school is often a bad time for the independentminded. but there is some advantage even here it teaches you what to avoid. if you later find yourself in a situation that makes you think this is like high school you know you should get out. 2another place where the independent and conventionalminded are thrown together is in successful startups. the founders and early employees are almost always independentminded otherwise the startup wouldnt be successful. but conventionalminded people greatly outnumber independentminded ones so as the company grows the original spirit of independentmindedness is inevitably diluted. this causes all kinds of problems besides the obvious one that the company starts to suck. one of the strangest is that the founders find themselves able to speak more freely with founders of other companies than with their own employees. 3fortunately you dont have to spend all your time with independentminded people. its enough to have one or two you can talk to regularly. and once you find them theyre usually as eager to talk as you are they need you too. although universities no longer have the kind of monopoly they used to have on education good universities are still an excellent way to meet independentminded people. most students will still be conventionalminded but youll at least find clumps of independentminded ones rather than the near zero you may have found in high school.it also works to go in the other direction as well as cultivating a small collection of independentminded friends to try to meet as many different types of people as you can. it will decrease the influence of your immediate peers if you have several other groups of peers. plus if youre part of several different worlds you can often import ideas from one to another.but by different types of people i dont mean demographically different. for this technique to work they have to think differently. so while its an excellent idea to go and visit other countries you can probably find people who think differently right around the corner. when i meet someone who knows a lot about something unusual which includes practically everyone if you dig deep enough i try to learn what they know that other people dont. there are almost always surprises here. its a good way to make conversation when you meet strangers but i dont do it to make conversation. i really want to know.you can expand the source of influences in time as well as space by reading history. when i read history i do it not just to learn what happened but to try to get inside the heads of people who lived in the past. how did things look to them this is hard to do but worth the effort for the same reason its worth travelling far to triangulate a point.you can also take more explicit measures to prevent yourself from automatically adopting conventional opinions. the most general is to cultivate an attitude of skepticism. when you hear someone say something stop and ask yourself is that true dont say it out loud. im not suggesting that you impose on everyone who talks to you the burden of proving what they say but rather that you take upon yourself the burden of evaluating what they say.treat it as a puzzle. you know that some accepted ideas will later turn out to be wrong. see if you can guess which. the end goal is not to find flaws in the things youre told but to find the new ideas that had been concealed by the broken ones. so this game should be an exciting quest for novelty not a boring protocol for intellectual hygiene. and youll be surprised when you start asking is this true how often the answer is not an immediate yes. if you have any imagination youre more likely to have too many leads to follow than too few.more generally your goal should be not to let anything into your head unexamined and things dont always enter your head in the form of statements. some of the most powerful influences are implicit. how do you even notice these by standing back and watching how other people get their ideas.when you stand back at a sufficient distance you can see ideas spreading through groups of people like waves. the most obvious are in fashion you notice a few people wearing a certain kind of shirt and then more and more until half the people around you are wearing the same shirt. you may not care much what you wear but there are intellectual fashions too and you definitely dont want to participate in those. not just because you want sovereignty over your own thoughts but because unfashionable ideas are disproportionately likely to lead somewhere interesting. the best place to find undiscovered ideas is where no one else is looking. 4to go beyond this general advice we need to look at the internal structure of independentmindedness  at the individual muscles we need to exercise as it were. it seems to me that it has three components fastidiousness about truth resistance to being told what to think and curiosity.fastidiousness about truth means more than just not believing things that are false. it means being careful about degree of belief. for most people degree of belief rushes unexamined toward the extremes the unlikely becomes impossible and the probable becomes certain. 5 to the independentminded this seems unpardonably sloppy. theyre willing to have anything in their heads from highly speculative hypotheses to apparent tautologies but on subjects they care about everything has to be labelled with a carefully considered degree of belief. 6the independentminded thus have a horror of ideologies which require one to accept a whole collection of beliefs at once and to treat them as articles of faith. to an independentminded person that would seem revolting just as it would seem to someone fastidious about food to take a bite of a submarine sandwich filled with a large variety of ingredients of indeterminate age and provenance.without this fastidiousness about truth you cant be truly independentminded. its not enough just to have resistance to being told what to think. those kind of people reject conventional ideas only to replace them with the most random conspiracy theories. and since these conspiracy theories have often been manufactured to capture them they end up being less independentminded than ordinary people because theyre subject to a much more exacting master than mere convention. 7can you increase your fastidiousness about truth i would think so. in my experience merely thinking about something youre fastidious about causes that fastidiousness to grow. if so this is one of those rare virtues we can have more of merely by wanting it. and if its like other forms of fastidiousness it should also be possible to encourage in children. i certainly got a strong dose of it from my father. 8the second component of independentmindedness resistance to being told what to think is the most visible of the three. but even this is often misunderstood. the big mistake people make about it is to think of it as a merely negative quality. the language we use reinforces that idea. youre unconventional. you dont care what other people think. but its not just a kind of immunity. in the most independentminded people the desire not to be told what to think is a positive force. its not mere skepticism but an active delight in ideas that subvert the conventional wisdom the more counterintuitive the better.some of the most novel ideas seemed at the time almost like practical jokes. think how often your reaction to a novel idea is to laugh. i dont think its because novel ideas are funny per se but because novelty and humor share a certain kind of surprisingness. but while not identical the two are close enough that there is a definite correlation between having a sense of humor and being independentminded  just as there is between being humorless and being conventionalminded. 9i dont think we can significantly increase our resistance to being told what to think. it seems the most innate of the three components of independentmindedness people who have this quality as adults usually showed all too visible signs of it as children. but if we cant increase our resistance to being told what to think we can at least shore it up by surrounding ourselves with other independentminded people.the third component of independentmindedness curiosity may be the most interesting. to the extent that we can give a brief answer to the question of where novel ideas come from its curiosity. thats what people are usually feeling before having them.in my experience independentmindedness and curiosity predict one another perfectly. everyone i know whos independentminded is deeply curious and everyone i know whos conventionalminded isnt. except curiously children. all small children are curious. perhaps the reason is that even the conventionalminded have to be curious in the beginning in order to learn what the conventions are. whereas the independentminded are the gluttons of curiosity who keep eating even after theyre full. 10the three components of independentmindedness work in concert fastidiousness about truth and resistance to being told what to think leave space in your brain and curiosity finds new ideas to fill it.interestingly the three components can substitute for one another in much the same way muscles can. if youre sufficiently fastidious about truth you dont need to be as resistant to being told what to think because fastidiousness alone will create sufficient gaps in your knowledge. and either one can compensate for curiosity because if you create enough space in your brain your discomfort at the resulting vacuum will add force to your curiosity. or curiosity can compensate for them if youre sufficiently curious you dont need to clear space in your brain because the new ideas you discover will push out the conventional ones you acquired by default.because the components of independentmindedness are so interchangeable you can have them to varying degrees and still get the same result. so there is not just a single model of independentmindedness. some independentminded people are openly subversive and others are quietly curious. they all know the secret handshake though.is there a way to cultivate curiosity to start with you want to avoid situations that suppress it. how much does the work youre currently doing engage your curiosity if the answer is not much maybe you should change something.the most important active step you can take to cultivate your curiosity is probably to seek out the topics that engage it. few adults are equally curious about everything and it doesnt seem as if you can choose which topics interest you. so its up to you to find them. or invent them if necessary.another way to increase your curiosity is to indulge it by investigating things youre interested in. curiosity is unlike most other appetites in this respect indulging it tends to increase rather than to sate it. questions lead to more questions.curiosity seems to be more individual than fastidiousness about truth or resistance to being told what to think. to the degree people have the latter two theyre usually pretty general whereas different people can be curious about very different things. so perhaps curiosity is the compass here. perhaps if your goal is to discover novel ideas your motto should not be do what you love so much as do what youre curious about.notes1 one convenient consequence of the fact that no one identifies as conventionalminded is that you can say what you like about conventionalminded people without getting in too much trouble. when i wrote the four quadrants of conformism i expected a firestorm of rage from the aggressively conventionalminded but in fact it was quite muted. they sensed that there was something about the essay that they disliked intensely but they had a hard time finding a specific passage to pin it on.2 when i ask myself what in my life is like high school the answer is twitter. its not just full of conventionalminded people as anything its size will inevitably be but subject to violent storms of conventionalmindedness that remind me of descriptions of jupiter. but while it probably is a net loss to spend time there it has at least made me think more about the distinction between independent and conventionalmindedness which i probably wouldnt have done otherwise.3 the decrease in independentmindedness in growing startups is still an open problem but there may be solutions.founders can delay the problem by making a conscious effort only to hire independentminded people. which of course also has the ancillary benefit that they have better ideas.another possible solution is to create policies that somehow disrupt the force of conformism much as control rods slow chain reactions so that the conventionalminded arent as dangerous. the physical separation of lockheeds skunk works may have had this as a side benefit. recent examples suggest employee forums like slack may not be an unmitigated good.the most radical solution would be to grow revenues without growing the company. you think hiring that junior pr person will be cheap compared to a programmer but what will be the effect on the average level of independentmindedness in your company the growth in staff relative to faculty seems to have had a similar effect on universities. perhaps the rule about outsourcing work thats not your core competency should be augmented by one about outsourcing work done by people whod ruin your culture as employees.some investment firms already seem to be able to grow revenues without growing the number of employees. automation plus the ever increasing articulation of the tech stack suggest this may one day be possible for product companies.4 there are intellectual fashions in every field but their influence varies. one of the reasons politics for example tends to be boring is that its so extremely subject to them. the threshold for having opinions about politics is much lower than the one for having opinions about set theory. so while there are some ideas in politics in practice they tend to be swamped by waves of intellectual fashion.5 the conventionalminded are often fooled by the strength of their opinions into believing that theyre independentminded. but strong convictions are not a sign of independentmindedness. rather the opposite.6 fastidiousness about truth doesnt imply that an independentminded person wont be dishonest but that he wont be deluded. its sort of like the definition of a gentleman as someone who is never unintentionally rude.7 you see this especially among political extremists. they think themselves nonconformists but actually theyre niche conformists. their opinions may be different from the average persons but they are often more influenced by their peers opinions than the average persons are.8 if we broaden the concept of fastidiousness about truth so that it excludes pandering bogusness and pomposity as well as falsehood in the strict sense our model of independentmindedness can expand further into the arts.9 this correlation is far from perfect though. gdel and dirac dont seem to have been very strong in the humor department. but someone who is both neurotypical and humorless is very likely to be conventionalminded.10 exception gossip. almost everyone is curious about gossip.

a palliative care nurse called bronnie ware made a list of the biggest regrets of the dying. her list seems plausible. i could see myself  can see myself  making at least 4 of these 5 mistakes.if you had to compress them into a single piece of advice it might be dont be a cog. the 5 regrets paint a portrait of postindustrial man who shrinks himself into a shape that fits his circumstances then turns dutifully till he stops.the alarming thing is the mistakes that produce these regrets are all errors of omission. you forget your dreams ignore your family suppress your feelings neglect your friends and forget to be happy. errors of omission are a particularly dangerous type of mistake because you make them by default.i would like to avoid making these mistakes. but how do you avoid mistakes you make by default ideally you transform your life so it has other defaults. but it may not be possible to do that completely. as long as these mistakes happen by default you probably have to be reminded not to make them. so i inverted the 5 regrets yielding a list of 5 commandsdont ignore your dreams dont work too much say what you think cultivate friendships be happy.which i then put at the top of the file i use as a todo list.

i realized recently that what one thinks about in the shower in the morning is more important than id thought. i knew it was a good time to have ideas. now id go further now id say its hard to do a really good job on anything you dont think about in the shower.everyone whos worked on difficult problems is probably familiar with the phenomenon of working hard to figure something out failing and then suddenly seeing the answer a bit later while doing something else. theres a kind of thinking you do without trying to. im increasingly convinced this type of thinking is not merely helpful in solving hard problems but necessary. the tricky part is you can only control it indirectly. 1i think most people have one top idea in their mind at any given time. thats the idea their thoughts will drift toward when theyre allowed to drift freely. and this idea will thus tend to get all the benefit of that type of thinking while others are starved of it. which means its a disaster to let the wrong idea become the top one in your mind.what made this clear to me was having an idea i didnt want as the top one in my mind for two long stretches.id noticed startups got way less done when they started raising money but it was not till we ourselves raised money that i understood why. the problem is not the actual time it takes to meet with investors. the problem is that once you start raising money raising money becomes the top idea in your mind. that becomes what you think about when you take a shower in the morning. and that means other questions arent.id hated raising money when i was running viaweb but id forgotten why i hated it so much. when we raised money for y combinator i remembered. money matters are particularly likely to become the top idea in your mind. the reason is that they have to be. its hard to get money. its not the sort of thing that happens by default. its not going to happen unless you let it become the thing you think about in the shower. and then youll make little progress on anything else youd rather be working on. 2i hear similar complaints from friends who are professors. professors nowadays seem to have become professional fundraisers who do a little research on the side. it may be time to fix that.the reason this struck me so forcibly is that for most of the preceding 10 years id been able to think about what i wanted. so the contrast when i couldnt was sharp. but i dont think this problem is unique to me because just about every startup ive seen grinds to a halt when they start raising money  or talking to acquirers.you cant directly control where your thoughts drift. if youre controlling them theyre not drifting. but you can control them indirectly by controlling what situations you let yourself get into. that has been the lesson for me be careful what you let become critical to you. try to get yourself into situations where the most urgent problems are ones you want to think about.you dont have complete control of course. an emergency could push other thoughts out of your head. but barring emergencies you have a good deal of indirect control over what becomes the top idea in your mind.ive found there are two types of thoughts especially worth avoiding  thoughts like the nile perch in the way they push out more interesting ideas. one ive already mentioned thoughts about money. getting money is almost by definition an attention sink. the other is disputes. these too are engaging in the wrong way they have the same velcrolike shape as genuinely interesting ideas but without the substance. so avoid disputes if you want to get real work done. 3even newton fell into this trap. after publishing his theory of colors in 1672 he found himself distracted by disputes for years finally concluding that the only solution was to stop publishingi see i have made myself a slave to philosophy but if i get free of mr linuss business i will resolutely bid adew to it eternally excepting what i do for my privat satisfaction or leave to come out after me. for i see a man must either resolve to put out nothing new or become a slave to defend it. 4linus and his students at liege were among the more tenacious critics. newtons biographer westfall seems to feel he was overreactingrecall that at the time he wrote newtons slavery consisted of five replies to liege totalling fourteen printed pages over the course of a year.im more sympathetic to newton. the problem was not the 14 pages but the pain of having this stupid controversy constantly reintroduced as the top idea in a mind that wanted so eagerly to think about other things.turning the other cheek turns out to have selfish advantages. someone who does you an injury hurts you twice first by the injury itself and second by taking up your time afterward thinking about it. if you learn to ignore injuries you can at least avoid the second half. ive found i can to some extent avoid thinking about nasty things people have done to me by telling myself this doesnt deserve space in my head. im always delighted to find ive forgotten the details of disputes because that means i hadnt been thinking about them. my wife thinks im more forgiving than she is but my motives are purely selfish.i suspect a lot of people arent sure whats the top idea in their mind at any given time. im often mistaken about it. i tend to think its the idea id want to be the top one rather than the one that is. but its easy to figure this out just take a shower. what topic do your thoughts keep returning to if its not what you want to be thinking about you may want to change something.

this essay grew out of something i wrote for myself to figure out what we do. even though y combinator is now 3 years old were still trying to understand its implications.i was annoyed recently to read a description of y combinator that said y combinator does seed funding for startups. what was especially annoying about it was that i wrote it. this doesnt really convey what we do. and the reason its inaccurate is that paradoxically funding very early stage startups is not mainly about funding.saying yc does seed funding for startups is a description in terms of earlier models. its like calling a car a horseless carriage.when you scale animals you cant just keep everything in proportion. for example volume grows as the cube of linear dimension but surface area only as the square. so as animals get bigger they have trouble radiating heat. thats why mice and rabbits are furry and elephants and hippos arent. you cant make a mouse by scaling down an elephant.yc represents a new smaller kind of animalso much smaller that all the rules are different.before us most companies in the startup funding business were venture capital funds. vcs generally fund later stage companies than we do. and they supply so much money that even though the other things they do may be very valuable its not that inaccurate to regard vcs as sources of money. good vcs are smart money but theyre still money.all good investors supply a combination of money and help. but these scale differently just as volume and surface area do. late stage investors supply huge amounts of money and comparatively little help when a company about to go public gets a mezzanine round of 50 million the deal tends to be almost entirely about money. as you move earlier in the venture funding process the ratio of help to money increases because earlier stage companies have different needs. early stage companies need less money because theyre smaller and cheaper to run but they need more help because life is so precarious for them. so when vcs do a series a round for say 2 million they generally expect to offer a significant amount of help along with the money.y combinator occupies the earliest end of the spectrum. were at least one and generally two steps before vc funding. though some startups go straight from yc to vc the most common trajectory is to do an angel round first. and what happens at y combinator is as different from what happens in a series a round as a series a round is from a mezzanine financing.at our end money is almost a negligible factor. the startup usually consists of just the founders. their living expenses are the companys main expense and since most founders are under 30 their living expenses are low. but at this early stage companies need a lot of help. practically every question is still unanswered. some companies weve funded have been working on their software for a year or more but others havent decided what to work on or even who the founders should be.when pr people and journalists recount the histories of startups after theyve become big they always underestimate how uncertain things were at first. theyre not being deliberately misleading. when you look at a company like google its hard to imagine they could once have been small and helpless. sure at one point they were a just a couple guys in a garagebut even then their greatness was assured and all they had to do was roll forward along the railroad tracks of destiny.far from it. a lot of startups with just as promising beginnings end up failing. google has such momentum now that it would be hard for anyone to stop them. but all it would have taken in the beginning would have been for two google employees to focus on the wrong things for six months and the company could have died.we know because weve been there just how vulnerable startups are in the earliest phases. curiously enough thats why founders tend to get so rich from them. reward is always proportionate to risk and very early stage startups are insanely risky.what we really do at y combinator is get startups launched straight. one of many metaphors you could use for yc is a steam catapult on an aircraft carrier. we get startups airborne. barely airborne but enough that they can accelerate fast.when youre launching planes they have to be set up properly or youre just launching projectiles. they have to be pointed straight down the deck the wings have to be trimmed properly the engines have to be at full power the pilot has to be ready. these are the kind of problems we deal with. after we fund startups we work closely with them for three monthsso closely in fact that we insist they move to where we are. and what we do in those three months is make sure everything is set up for launch. if there are tensions between cofounders we help sort them out. we get all the paperwork set up properly so there are no nasty surprises later. if the founders arent sure what to focus on first we try to figure that out. if there is some obstacle right in front of them we either try to remove it or shift the startup sideways. the goal is to get every distraction out of the way so the founders can use that time to build or finish building something impressive. and then near the end of the three months we push the button on the steam catapult in the form of demo day where the current group of startups present to pretty much every investor in silicon valley.launching companies isnt identical with launching products. though we do spend a lot of time on launch strategies for products there are some things that take too long to build for a startup to launch them before raising their next round of funding. several of the most promising startups weve funded havent launched their products yet but are definitely launched as companies.in the earliest stage startups not only have more questions to answer but they tend to be different kinds of questions. in later stage startups the questions are about deals or hiring or organization. in the earliest phase they tend to be about technology and design. what do you make thats the first problem to solve. thats why our motto is make something people want. this is always a good thing for companies to do but its even more important early on because it sets the bounds for every other question. who you hire how much money you raise how you market yourselfthey all depend on what youre making.because the early problems are so much about technology and design you probably need to be hackers to do what we do. while some vcs have technical backgrounds i dont know any who still write code. their expertise is mostly in businessas it should be because thats the kind of expertise you need in the phase between series a and if youre lucky ipo.were so different from vcs that were really a different kind of animal. can we claim founders are better off as a result of this new type of venture firm im pretty sure the answer is yes because yc is an improved version of what happened to our startup and our case was not atypical. we started viaweb with 10000 in seed money from our friend julian. he was a lawyer and arranged all our paperwork so we could just code. we spent three months building a version 1 which we then presented to investors to raise more money. sounds familiar doesnt it but yc improves on that significantly. julian knew a lot about law and business but his advice ended there he was not a startup guy. so we made some basic mistakes early on. and when we presented to investors we presented to only 2 because that was all we knew. if wed had our later selves to encourage and advise us and demo day to present at we would have been in much better shape. we probably could have raised money at 3 to 5 times the valuation we did.if we take 7 of a company we fund the founders only have to do 7.5 better in their next round of funding to end up net ahead. we certainly manage that.so who is our 7 coming out of if the founders end up net ahead its not coming out of them. so is it coming out of later stage investors well they do end up paying more. but i think they pay more because the company is actually more valuable. and later stage investors have no problem with that. the returns of a vc fund depend on the quality of the companies they invest in not how cheaply they can buy stock in them.if what we do is useful why wasnt anyone doing it before there are two answers to that. one is that people were doing it before just haphazardly on a smaller scale. before us seed funding came primarily from individual angel investors. larry and sergey for example got their seed funding from andy bechtolsheim one of the founders of sun. and because he was a startup guy he probably gave them useful advice. but raising money from angel investors is a hit or miss thing. its a sideline for most of them so they only do a handful of deals a year and they dont spend a lot of time on the startups they invest in. and theyre hard to reach because they dont want random startups pestering them with business plans. the google guys were lucky because they knew someone who knew bechtolsheim. it generally takes a personal introduction with angels.the other reason no one was doing quite what we do is that till recently it was a lot more expensive to start a startup. youll notice we havent funded any biotech startups. thats still expensive. but advancing technology has made web startups so cheap that you really can get a company airborne for 15000. if you understand how to operate a steam catapult at least.so in effect whats happened is that a new ecological niche has opened up and y combinator is the new kind of animal that has moved into it. were not a replacement for venture capital funds. we occupy a new adjacent niche. and conditions in our niche are really quite different. its not just that the problems we face are different the whole structure of the business is different. vcs are playing a zerosum game. theyre all competing for a slice of a fixed amount of deal flow and that explains a lot of their behavior. whereas our m.o. is to create new deal flow by encouraging hackers who would have gotten jobs to start their own startups instead. we compete more with employers than vcs.its not surprising something like this would happen. most fields become more specializedmore articulatedas they develop and startups are certainly an area in which there has been a lot of development over the past couple decades. the venture business in its present form is only about forty years old. it stands to reason it would evolve.and its natural that the new niche would at first be described even by its inhabitants in terms of the old one. but really y combinator is not in the startup funding business. really were more of a small furry steam catapult.

the web is turning writing into a conversation. twenty years ago writers wrote and readers read. the web lets readers respond and increasingly they doin comment threads on forums and in their own blog posts.many who respond to something disagree with it. thats to be expected. agreeing tends to motivate people less than disagreeing. and when you agree theres less to say. you could expand on something the author said but he has probably already explored the most interesting implications. when you disagree youre entering territory he may not have explored.the result is theres a lot more disagreeing going on especially measured by the word. that doesnt mean people are getting angrier. the structural change in the way we communicate is enough to account for it. but though its not anger thats driving the increase in disagreement theres a danger that the increase in disagreement will make people angrier. particularly online where its easy to say things youd never say face to face.if were all going to be disagreeing more we should be careful to do it well. what does it mean to disagree well most readers can tell the difference between mere namecalling and a carefully reasoned refutation but i think it would help to put names on the intermediate stages. so heres an attempt at a disagreement hierarchydh0. namecalling.this is the lowest form of disagreement and probably also the most common. weve all seen comments like thisu r a fagbut its important to realize that more articulate namecalling has just as little weight. a comment likethe author is a selfimportant dilettante.is really nothing more than a pretentious version of u r a fag.dh1. ad hominem.an ad hominem attack is not quite as weak as mere namecalling. it might actually carry some weight. for example if a senator wrote an article saying senators salaries should be increased one could respondof course he would say that. hes a senator.this wouldnt refute the authors argument but it may at least be relevant to the case. its still a very weak form of disagreement though. if theres something wrong with the senators argument you should say what it is and if there isnt what difference does it make that hes a senatorsaying that an author lacks the authority to write about a topic is a variant of ad hominemand a particularly useless sort because good ideas often come from outsiders. the question is whether the author is correct or not. if his lack of authority caused him to make mistakes point those out. and if it didnt its not a problem.dh2. responding to tone.the next level up we start to see responses to the writing rather than the writer. the lowest form of these is to disagree with the authors tone. e.g.i cant believe the author dismisses intelligent design in such a cavalier fashion.though better than attacking the author this is still a weak form of disagreement. it matters much more whether the author is wrong or right than what his tone is. especially since tone is so hard to judge. someone who has a chip on their shoulder about some topic might be offended by a tone that to other readers seemed neutral.so if the worst thing you can say about something is to criticize its tone youre not saying much. is the author flippant but correct better that than grave and wrong. and if the author is incorrect somewhere say where.dh3. contradiction.in this stage we finally get responses to what was said rather than how or by whom. the lowest form of response to an argument is simply to state the opposing case with little or no supporting evidence.this is often combined with dh2 statements as ini cant believe the author dismisses intelligent design in such a cavalier fashion. intelligent design is a legitimate scientific theory.contradiction can sometimes have some weight. sometimes merely seeing the opposing case stated explicitly is enough to see that its right. but usually evidence will help.dh4. counterargument.at level 4 we reach the first form of convincing disagreement counterargument. forms up to this point can usually be ignored as proving nothing. counterargument might prove something. the problem is its hard to say exactly what.counterargument is contradiction plus reasoning andor evidence. when aimed squarely at the original argument it can be convincing. but unfortunately its common for counterarguments to be aimed at something slightly different. more often than not two people arguing passionately about something are actually arguing about two different things. sometimes they even agree with one another but are so caught up in their squabble they dont realize it.there could be a legitimate reason for arguing against something slightly different from what the original author said when you feel they missed the heart of the matter. but when you do that you should say explicitly youre doing it.dh5. refutation.the most convincing form of disagreement is refutation. its also the rarest because its the most work. indeed the disagreement hierarchy forms a kind of pyramid in the sense that the higher you go the fewer instances you find.to refute someone you probably have to quote them. you have to find a smoking gun a passage in whatever you disagree with that you feel is mistaken and then explain why its mistaken. if you cant find an actual quote to disagree with you may be arguing with a straw man.while refutation generally entails quoting quoting doesnt necessarily imply refutation. some writers quote parts of things they disagree with to give the appearance of legitimate refutation then follow with a response as low as dh3 or even dh0.dh6. refuting the central point.the force of a refutation depends on what you refute. the most powerful form of disagreement is to refute someones central point.even as high as dh5 we still sometimes see deliberate dishonesty as when someone picks out minor points of an argument and refutes those. sometimes the spirit in which this is done makes it more of a sophisticated form of ad hominem than actual refutation. for example correcting someones grammar or harping on minor mistakes in names or numbers. unless the opposing argument actually depends on such things the only purpose of correcting them is to discredit ones opponent.truly refuting something requires one to refute its central point or at least one of them. and that means one has to commit explicitly to what the central point is. so a truly effective refutation would look likethe authors main point seems to be x. as he saysquotationbut this is wrong for the following reasons...the quotation you point out as mistaken need not be the actual statement of the authors main point. its enough to refute something it depends upon.what it meansnow we have a way of classifying forms of disagreement. what good is it one thing the disagreement hierarchy doesnt give us is a way of picking a winner. dh levels merely describe the form of a statement not whether its correct. a dh6 response could still be completely mistaken.but while dh levels dont set a lower bound on the convincingness of a reply they do set an upper bound. a dh6 response might be unconvincing but a dh2 or lower response is always unconvincing.the most obvious advantage of classifying the forms of disagreement is that it will help people to evaluate what they read. in particular it will help them to see through intellectually dishonest arguments. an eloquent speaker or writer can give the impression of vanquishing an opponent merely by using forceful words. in fact that is probably the defining quality of a demagogue. by giving names to the different forms of disagreement we give critical readers a pin for popping such balloons.such labels may help writers too. most intellectual dishonesty is unintentional. someone arguing against the tone of something he disagrees with may believe hes really saying something. zooming out and seeing his current position on the disagreement hierarchy may inspire him to try moving up to counterargument or refutation.but the greatest benefit of disagreeing well is not just that it will make conversations better but that it will make the people who have them happier. if you study conversations you find there is a lot more meanness down in dh1 than up in dh6. you dont have to be mean when you have a real point to make. in fact you dont want to. if you have something real to say being mean just gets in the way.if moving up the disagreement hierarchy makes people less mean that will make most of them happier. most people dont really enjoy being mean they do it because they cant help it.

om malik is the most recent of many people to ask why twitter is such a big deal.the reason is that its a new messaging protocol where you dont specify the recipients. new protocols are rare. or more precisely new protocols that take off are. there are only a handful of commonly used ones tcpip the internet smtp email http the web and so on. so any new protocol is a big deal. but twitter is a protocol owned by a private company. thats even rarer.curiously the fact that the founders of twitter have been slow to monetize it may in the long run prove to be an advantage. because they havent tried to control it too much twitter feels to everyone like previous protocols. one forgets its owned by a private company. that must have made it easier for twitter to spread.

what should an essay be many people would say persuasive. thats what a lot of us were taught essays should be. but i think we can aim for something more ambitious that an essay should be useful.to start with that means it should be correct. but its not enough merely to be correct. its easy to make a statement correct by making it vague. thats a common flaw in academic writing for example. if you know nothing at all about an issue you cant go wrong by saying that the issue is a complex one that there are many factors to be considered that its a mistake to take too simplistic a view of it and so on.though no doubt correct such statements tell the reader nothing. useful writing makes claims that are as strong as they can be made without becoming false.for example its more useful to say that pikes peak is near the middle of colorado than merely somewhere in colorado. but if i say its in the exact middle of colorado ive now gone too far because its a bit east of the middle.precision and correctness are like opposing forces. its easy to satisfy one if you ignore the other. the converse of vaporous academic writing is the bold but false rhetoric of demagogues. useful writing is bold but true.its also two other things it tells people something important and that at least some of them didnt already know.telling people something they didnt know doesnt always mean surprising them. sometimes it means telling them something they knew unconsciously but had never put into words. in fact those may be the more valuable insights because they tend to be more fundamental.lets put them all together. useful writing tells people something true and important that they didnt already know and tells them as unequivocally as possible.notice these are all a matter of degree. for example you cant expect an idea to be novel to everyone. any insight that you have will probably have already been had by at least one of the worlds 7 billion people. but its sufficient if an idea is novel to a lot of readers.ditto for correctness importance and strength. in effect the four components are like numbers you can multiply together to get a score for usefulness. which i realize is almost awkwardly reductive but nonetheless true.how can you ensure that the things you say are true and novel and important believe it or not there is a trick for doing this. i learned it from my friend robert morris who has a horror of saying anything dumb. his trick is not to say anything unless hes sure its worth hearing. this makes it hard to get opinions out of him but when you do theyre usually right.translated into essay writing what this means is that if you write a bad sentence you dont publish it. you delete it and try again. often you abandon whole branches of four or five paragraphs. sometimes a whole essay.you cant ensure that every idea you have is good but you can ensure that every one you publish is by simply not publishing the ones that arent.in the sciences this is called publication bias and is considered bad. when some hypothesis youre exploring gets inconclusive results youre supposed to tell people about that too. but with essay writing publication bias is the way to go.my strategy is loose then tight. i write the first draft of an essay fast trying out all kinds of ideas. then i spend days rewriting it very carefully.ive never tried to count how many times i proofread essays but im sure there are sentences ive read 100 times before publishing them. when i proofread an essay there are usually passages that stick out in an annoying way sometimes because theyre clumsily written and sometimes because im not sure theyre true. the annoyance starts out unconscious but after the tenth reading or so im saying ugh that part each time i hit it. they become like briars that catch your sleeve as you walk past. usually i wont publish an essay till theyre all gone  till i can read through the whole thing without the feeling of anything catching.ill sometimes let through a sentence that seems clumsy if i cant think of a way to rephrase it but i will never knowingly let through one that doesnt seem correct. you never have to. if a sentence doesnt seem right all you have to do is ask why it doesnt and youve usually got the replacement right there in your head.this is where essayists have an advantage over journalists. you dont have a deadline. you can work for as long on an essay as you need to get it right. you dont have to publish the essay at all if you cant get it right. mistakes seem to lose courage in the face of an enemy with unlimited resources. or thats what it feels like. whats really going on is that you have different expectations for yourself. youre like a parent saying to a child we can sit here all night till you eat your vegetables. except youre the child too.im not saying no mistake gets through. for example i added condition c in a way to detect bias after readers pointed out that id omitted it. but in practice you can catch nearly all of them.theres a trick for getting importance too. its like the trick i suggest to young founders for getting startup ideas to make something you yourself want. you can use yourself as a proxy for the reader. the reader is not completely unlike you so if you write about topics that seem important to you theyll probably seem important to a significant number of readers as well.importance has two factors. its the number of people something matters to times how much it matters to them. which means of course that its not a rectangle but a sort of ragged comb like a riemann sum.the way to get novelty is to write about topics youve thought about a lot. then you can use yourself as a proxy for the reader in this department too. anything you notice that surprises you whove thought about the topic a lot will probably also surprise a significant number of readers. and here as with correctness and importance you can use the morris technique to ensure that you will. if you dont learn anything from writing an essay dont publish it.you need humility to measure novelty because acknowledging the novelty of an idea means acknowledging your previous ignorance of it. confidence and humility are often seen as opposites but in this case as in many others confidence helps you to be humble. if you know youre an expert on some topic you can freely admit when you learn something you didnt know because you can be confident that most other people wouldnt know it either.the fourth component of useful writing strength comes from two things thinking well and the skillful use of qualification. these two counterbalance each other like the accelerator and clutch in a car with a manual transmission. as you try to refine the expression of an idea you adjust the qualification accordingly. something youre sure of you can state baldly with no qualification at all as i did the four components of useful writing. whereas points that seem dubious have to be held at arms length with perhapses.as you refine an idea youre pushing in the direction of less qualification. but you can rarely get it down to zero. sometimes you dont even want to if its a side point and a fully refined version would be too long.some say that qualifications weaken writing. for example that you should never begin a sentence in an essay with i think because if youre saying it then of course you think it. and its true that i think x is a weaker statement than simply x. which is exactly why you need i think. you need it to express your degree of certainty.but qualifications are not scalars. theyre not just experimental error. there must be 50 things they can express how broadly something applies how you know it how happy you are its so even how it could be falsified. im not going to try to explore the structure of qualification here. its probably more complex than the whole topic of writing usefully. instead ill just give you a practical tip dont underestimate qualification. its an important skill in its own right not just a sort of tax you have to pay in order to avoid saying things that are false. so learn and use its full range. it may not be fully half of having good ideas but its part of having them.theres one other quality i aim for in essays to say things as simply as possible. but i dont think this is a component of usefulness. its more a matter of consideration for the reader. and its a practical aid in getting things right a mistake is more obvious when expressed in simple language. but ill admit that the main reason i write simply is not for the readers sake or because it helps get things right but because it bothers me to use more or fancier words than i need to. it seems inelegant like a program thats too long.i realize florid writing works for some people. but unless youre sure youre one of them the best advice is to write as simply as you can.i believe the formula ive given you importance  novelty  correctness  strength is the recipe for a good essay. but i should warn you that its also a recipe for making people mad.the root of the problem is novelty. when you tell people something they didnt know they dont always thank you for it. sometimes the reason people dont know something is because they dont want to know it. usually because it contradicts some cherished belief. and indeed if youre looking for novel ideas popular but mistaken beliefs are a good place to find them. every popular mistaken belief creates a dead zone of ideas around it that are relatively unexplored because they contradict it.the strength component just makes things worse. if theres anything that annoys people more than having their cherished assumptions contradicted its having them flatly contradicted.plus if youve used the morris technique your writing will seem quite confident. perhaps offensively confident to people who disagree with you. the reason youll seem confident is that you are confident youve cheated by only publishing the things youre sure of. it will seem to people who try to disagree with you that you never admit youre wrong. in fact you constantly admit youre wrong. you just do it before publishing instead of after.and if your writing is as simple as possible that just makes things worse. brevity is the diction of command. if you watch someone delivering unwelcome news from a position of inferiority youll notice they tend to use lots of words to soften the blow. whereas to be short with someone is more or less to be rude to them.it can sometimes work to deliberately phrase statements more weakly than you mean. to put perhaps in front of something youre actually quite sure of. but youll notice that when writers do this they usually do it with a wink.i dont like to do this too much. its cheesy to adopt an ironic tone for a whole essay. i think we just have to face the fact that elegance and curtness are two names for the same thing.you might think that if you work sufficiently hard to ensure that an essay is correct it will be invulnerable to attack. thats sort of true. it will be invulnerable to valid attacks. but in practice thats little consolation.in fact the strength component of useful writing will make you particularly vulnerable to misrepresentation. if youve stated an idea as strongly as you could without making it false all anyone has to do is to exaggerate slightly what you said and now it is false.much of the time theyre not even doing it deliberately. one of the most surprising things youll discover if you start writing essays is that people who disagree with you rarely disagree with what youve actually written. instead they make up something you said and disagree with that.for what its worth the countermove is to ask someone who does this to quote a specific sentence or passage you wrote that they believe is false and explain why. i say for what its worth because they never do. so although it might seem that this could get a broken discussion back on track the truth is that it was never on track in the first place.should you explicitly forestall likely misinterpretations yes if theyre misinterpretations a reasonably smart and wellintentioned person might make. in fact its sometimes better to say something slightly misleading and then add the correction than to try to get an idea right in one shot. that can be more efficient and can also model the way such an idea would be discovered.but i dont think you should explicitly forestall intentional misinterpretations in the body of an essay. an essay is a place to meet honest readers. you dont want to spoil your house by putting bars on the windows to protect against dishonest ones. the place to protect against intentional misinterpretations is in endnotes. but dont think you can predict them all. people are as ingenious at misrepresenting you when you say something they dont want to hear as they are at coming up with rationalizations for things they want to do but know they shouldnt. i suspect its the same skill.as with most other things the way to get better at writing essays is to practice. but how do you start now that weve examined the structure of useful writing we can rephrase that question more precisely. which constraint do you relax initially the answer is the first component of importance the number of people who care about what you write.if you narrow the topic sufficiently you can probably find something youre an expert on. write about that to start with. if you only have ten readers who care thats fine. youre helping them and youre writing. later you can expand the breadth of topics you write about.the other constraint you can relax is a little surprising publication. writing essays doesnt have to mean publishing them. that may seem strange now that the trend is to publish every random thought but it worked for me. i wrote what amounted to essays in notebooks for about 15 years. i never published any of them and never expected to. i wrote them as a way of figuring things out. but when the web came along id had a lot of practice.incidentally steve wozniak did the same thing. in high school he designed computers on paper for fun. he couldnt build them because he couldnt afford the components. but when intel launched 4k drams in 1975 he was ready.how many essays are there left to write though the answer to that question is probably the most exciting thing ive learned about essay writing. nearly all of them are left to write.although the essay is an old form it hasnt been assiduously cultivated. in the print era publication was expensive and there wasnt enough demand for essays to publish that many. you could publish essays if you were already well known for writing something else like novels. or you could write book reviews that you took over to express your own ideas. but there was not really a direct path to becoming an essayist. which meant few essays got written and those that did tended to be about a narrow range of subjects.now thanks to the internet theres a path. anyone can publish essays online. you start in obscurity perhaps but at least you can start. you dont need anyones permission.it sometimes happens that an area of knowledge sits quietly for years till some change makes it explode. cryptography did this to number theory. the internet is doing it to the essay.the exciting thing is not that theres a lot left to write but that theres a lot left to discover. theres a certain kind of idea thats best discovered by writing essays. if most essays are still unwritten most such ideas are still undiscovered.

life is short as everyone knows. when i was a kid i used to wonder about this. is life actually short or are we really complaining about its finiteness would we be just as likely to feel life was short if we lived 10 times as longsince there didnt seem any way to answer this question i stopped wondering about it. then i had kids. that gave me a way to answer the question and the answer is that life actually is short.having kids showed me how to convert a continuous quantity time into discrete quantities. you only get 52 weekends with your 2 year old. if christmasasmagic lasts from say ages 3 to 10 you only get to watch your child experience it 8 times. and while its impossible to say what is a lot or a little of a continuous quantity like time 8 is not a lot of something. if you had a handful of 8 peanuts or a shelf of 8 books to choose from the quantity would definitely seem limited no matter what your lifespan was.ok so life actually is short. does it make any difference to know thatit has for me. it means arguments of the form life is too short for x have great force. its not just a figure of speech to say that life is too short for something. its not just a synonym for annoying. if you find yourself thinking that life is too short for something you should try to eliminate it if you can.when i ask myself what ive found life is too short for the word that pops into my head is bullshit. i realize that answer is somewhat tautological. its almost the definition of bullshit that its the stuff that life is too short for. and yet bullshit does have a distinctive character. theres something fake about it. its the junk food of experience. 1if you ask yourself what you spend your time on thats bullshit you probably already know the answer. unnecessary meetings pointless disputes bureaucracy posturing dealing with other peoples mistakes traffic jams addictive but unrewarding pastimes.there are two ways this kind of thing gets into your life its either forced on you or it tricks you. to some extent you have to put up with the bullshit forced on you by circumstances. you need to make money and making money consists mostly of errands. indeed the law of supply and demand ensures that the more rewarding some kind of work is the cheaper people will do it. it may be that less bullshit is forced on you than you think though. there has always been a stream of people who opt out of the default grind and go live somewhere where opportunities are fewer in the conventional sense but life feels more authentic. this could become more common.you can do it on a smaller scale without moving. the amount of time you have to spend on bullshit varies between employers. most large organizations and many small ones are steeped in it. but if you consciously prioritize bullshit avoidance over other factors like money and prestige you can probably find employers that will waste less of your time.if youre a freelancer or a small company you can do this at the level of individual customers. if you fire or avoid toxic customers you can decrease the amount of bullshit in your life by more than you decrease your income.but while some amount of bullshit is inevitably forced on you the bullshit that sneaks into your life by tricking you is no ones fault but your own. and yet the bullshit you choose may be harder to eliminate than the bullshit thats forced on you. things that lure you into wasting your time have to be really good at tricking you. an example that will be familiar to a lot of people is arguing online. when someone contradicts you theyre in a sense attacking you. sometimes pretty overtly. your instinct when attacked is to defend yourself. but like a lot of instincts this one wasnt designed for the world we now live in. counterintuitive as it feels its better most of the time not to defend yourself. otherwise these people are literally taking your life. 2arguing online is only incidentally addictive. there are more dangerous things than that. as ive written before one byproduct of technical progress is that things we like tend to become more addictive. which means we will increasingly have to make a conscious effort to avoid addictions  to stand outside ourselves and ask is this how i want to be spending my timeas well as avoiding bullshit one should actively seek out things that matter. but different things matter to different people and most have to learn what matters to them. a few are lucky and realize early on that they love math or taking care of animals or writing and then figure out a way to spend a lot of time doing it. but most people start out with a life thats a mix of things that matter and things that dont and only gradually learn to distinguish between them.for the young especially much of this confusion is induced by the artificial situations they find themselves in. in middle school and high school what the other kids think of you seems the most important thing in the world. but when you ask adults what they got wrong at that age nearly all say they cared too much what other kids thought of them.one heuristic for distinguishing stuff that matters is to ask yourself whether youll care about it in the future. fake stuff that matters usually has a sharp peak of seeming to matter. thats how it tricks you. the area under the curve is small but its shape jabs into your consciousness like a pin.the things that matter arent necessarily the ones people would call important. having coffee with a friend matters. you wont feel later like that was a waste of time.one great thing about having small children is that they make you spend time on things that matter them. they grab your sleeve as youre staring at your phone and say will you play with me and odds are that is in fact the bullshitminimizing option.if life is short we should expect its shortness to take us by surprise. and that is just what tends to happen. you take things for granted and then theyre gone. you think you can always write that book or climb that mountain or whatever and then you realize the window has closed. the saddest windows close when other people die. their lives are short too. after my mother died i wished id spent more time with her. i lived as if shed always be there. and in her typical quiet way she encouraged that illusion. but an illusion it was. i think a lot of people make the same mistake i did.the usual way to avoid being taken by surprise by something is to be consciously aware of it. back when life was more precarious people used to be aware of death to a degree that would now seem a bit morbid. im not sure why but it doesnt seem the right answer to be constantly reminding oneself of the grim reaper hovering at everyones shoulder. perhaps a better solution is to look at the problem from the other end. cultivate a habit of impatience about the things you most want to do. dont wait before climbing that mountain or writing that book or visiting your mother. you dont need to be constantly reminding yourself why you shouldnt wait. just dont wait.i can think of two more things one does when one doesnt have much of something try to get more of it and savor what one has. both make sense here.how you live affects how long you live. most people could do better. me among them.but you can probably get even more effect by paying closer attention to the time you have. its easy to let the days rush by. the flow that imaginative people love so much has a darker cousin that prevents you from pausing to savor life amid the daily slurry of errands and alarms. one of the most striking things ive read was not in a book but the title of one james salters burning the days.it is possible to slow time somewhat. ive gotten better at it. kids help. when you have small children there are a lot of moments so perfect that you cant help noticing.it does help too to feel that youve squeezed everything out of some experience. the reason im sad about my mother is not just that i miss her but that i think of all the things we could have done that we didnt. my oldest son will be 7 soon. and while i miss the 3 year old version of him i at least dont have any regrets over what might have been. we had the best time a daddy and a 3 year old ever had.relentlessly prune bullshit dont wait to do things that matter and savor the time you have. thats what you do when life is short.

a few hours before the yahoo acquisition was announced in june 1998 i took a snapshot of viawebs site. i thought it might be interesting to look at one day.the first thing one notices is is how tiny the pages are. screens were a lot smaller in 1998. if i remember correctly our frontpage used to just fit in the size window people typically used then.browsers then ie 6 was still 3 years in the future had few fonts and they werent antialiased. if you wanted to make pages that looked good you had to render display text as images.you may notice a certain similarity between the viaweb and y combinator logos. we did that as an inside joke when we started yc. considering how basic a red circle is it seemed surprising to me when we started viaweb how few other companies used one as their logo. a bit later i realized why.on the company page youll notice a mysterious individual called john mcartyem. robert morris aka rtm was so publicity averse after the worm that he didnt want his name on the site. i managed to get him to agree to a compromise we could use his bio but not his name. he has since relaxed a bit on that point.trevor graduated at about the same time the acquisition closed so in the course of 4 days he went from impecunious grad student to millionaire phd. the culmination of my career as a writer of press releases was one celebrating his graduation illustrated with a drawing i did of him during a meeting.trevor also appears as trevino bagwell in our directory of web designers merchants could hire to build stores for them. we inserted him as a ringer in case some competitor tried to spam our web designers. we assumed his logo would deter any actual customers but it did not.back in the 90s to get users you had to get mentioned in magazines and newspapers. there were not the same ways to get found online that there are today. so we used to pay a pr firm 16000 a month to get us mentioned in the press. fortunately reporters liked us.in our advice about getting traffic from search engines i dont think the term seo had been coined yet we say there are only 7 that matter yahoo altavista excite webcrawler infoseek lycos and hotbot. notice anything missing google was incorporated that september.we supported online transactions via a company called cybercash since if we lacked that feature wed have gotten beaten up in product comparisons. but cybercash was so bad and most stores order volumes were so low that it was better if merchants processed orders like phone orders. we had a page in our site trying to talk merchants out of doing real time authorizations.the whole site was organized like a funnel directing people to the test drive. it was a novel thing to be able to try out software online. we put cgibin in our dynamic urls to fool competitors about how our software worked.we had some well known users. needless to say fredericks of hollywood got the most traffic. we charged a flat fee of 300month for big stores so it was a little alarming to have users who got lots of traffic. i once calculated how much fredericks was costing us in bandwidth and it was about 300month.since we hosted all the stores which together were getting just over 10 million page views per month in june 1998 we consumed what at the time seemed a lot of bandwidth. we had 2 t1s 3 mbsec coming into our offices. in those days there was no aws. even colocating servers seemed too risky considering how often things went wrong with them. so we had our servers in our offices. or more precisely in trevors office. in return for the unique privilege of sharing his office with no other humans he had to share it with 6 shrieking tower servers. his office was nicknamed the hot tub on account of the heat they generated. most days his stack of window air conditioners could keep up.for describing pages we had a template language called rtml which supposedly stood for something but which in fact i named after rtm. rtml was common lisp augmented by some macros and libraries and concealed under a structure editor that made it look like it had syntax.since we did continuous releases our software didnt actually have versions. but in those days the trade press expected versions so we made them up. if we wanted to get lots of attention we made the version number an integer. that version 4.0 icon was generated by our own button generator incidentally. the whole viaweb site was made with our software even though it wasnt an online store because we wanted to experience what our users did.at the end of 1997 we released a general purpose shopping search engine called shopfind. it was pretty advanced for the time. it had a programmable crawler that could crawl most of the different stores online and pick out the products.

since i was about 9 ive been puzzled by the apparent contradiction between being made of matter that behaves in a predictable way and the feeling that i could choose to do whatever i wanted. at the time i had a selfinterested motive for exploring the question. at that age like most succeeding ages i was always in trouble with the authorities and it seemed to me that there might possibly be some way to get out of trouble by arguing that i wasnt responsible for my actions. i gradually lost hope of that but the puzzle remained how do you reconcile being a machine made of matter with the feeling that youre free to choose what you do 1the best way to explain the answer may be to start with a slightly wrong version and then fix it. the wrong version is you can do what you want but you cant want what you want. yes you can control what you do but youll do what you want and you cant control that.the reason this is mistaken is that people do sometimes change what they want. people who dont want to want something  drug addicts for example  can sometimes make themselves stop wanting it. and people who want to want something  who want to like classical music or broccoli  sometimes succeed.so we modify our initial statement you can do what you want but you cant want to want what you want.thats still not quite true. its possible to change what you want to want. i can imagine someone saying i decided to stop wanting to like classical music. but were getting closer to the truth. its rare for people to change what they want to want and the more want tos we add the rarer it gets.we can get arbitrarily close to a true statement by adding more want tos in much the same way we can get arbitrarily close to 1 by adding more 9s to a string of 9s following a decimal point. in practice three or four want tos must surely be enough. its hard even to envision what it would mean to change what you want to want to want to want let alone actually do it.so one way to express the correct answer is to use a regular expression. you can do what you want but theres some statement of the form you cant want to want what you want thats true. ultimately you get back to a want that you dont control. 2

when people say that in their experience all programming languages are basically equivalent theyre making a statement not about languages but about the kind of programming theyve done.99.5 of programming consists of gluing together calls to library functions. all popular languages are equally good at this. so one can easily spend ones whole career operating in the intersection of popular programming languages.but the other .5 of programming is disproportionately interesting. if you want to learn what it consists of the weirdness of weird languages is a good clue to follow.weird languages arent weird by accident. not the good ones at least. the weirdness of the good ones usually implies the existence of some form of programming thats not just the usual gluing together of library calls.a concrete example lisp macros. lisp macros seem weird even to many lisp programmers. theyre not only not in the intersection of popular languages but by their nature would be hard to implement properly in a language without turning it into a dialect of lisp. and macros are definitely evidence of techniques that go beyond glue programming. for example solving problems by first writing a language for problems of that type and then writing your specific application in it. nor is this all you can do with macros its just one region in a space of programmanipulating techniques that even now is far from fully explored.so if you want to expand your concept of what programming can be one way to do it is by learning weird languages. pick a language that most programmers consider weird but whose median user is smart and then focus on the differences between this language and the intersection of popular languages. what can you say in this language that would be impossibly inconvenient to say in others in the process of learning how to say things you couldnt previously say youll probably be learning how to think things you couldnt previously think.

theres some debate about whether its a good idea to follow your passion. in fact the question is impossible to answer with a simple yes or no. sometimes you should and sometimes you shouldnt but the border between should and shouldnt is very complicated. the only way to give a general answer is to trace it.when people talk about this question theres always an implicit instead of. all other things being equal why wouldnt you work on what interests you the most so even raising the question implies that all other things arent equal and that you have to choose between working on what interests you the most and something else like what pays the best.and indeed if your main goal is to make money you cant usually afford to work on what interests you the most. people pay you for doing what they want not what you want. but theres an obvious exception when you both want the same thing. for example if you love football and youre good enough at it you can get paid a lot to play it.of course the odds are against you in a case like football because so many other people like playing it too. this is not to say you shouldnt try though. it depends how much ability you have and how hard youre willing to work.the odds are better when you have strange tastes when you like something that pays well and that few other people like. for example its clear that bill gates truly loved running a software company. he didnt just love programming which a lot of people do. he loved writing software for customers. that is a very strange taste indeed but if you have it you can make a lot by indulging it.there are even some people who have a genuine intellectual interest in making money. this is distinct from mere greed. they just cant help noticing when something is mispriced and cant help doing something about it. its like a puzzle for them. 1in fact theres an edge case here so spectacular that it turns all the preceding advice on its head. if you want to make a really huge amount of money  hundreds of millions or even billions of dollars  it turns out to be very useful to work on what interests you the most. the reason is not the extra motivation you get from doing this but that the way to make a really large amount of money is to start a startup and working on what interests you is an excellent way to discover startup ideas.many if not most of the biggest startups began as projects the founders were doing for fun. apple google and facebook all began that way. why is this pattern so common because the best ideas tend to be such outliers that youd overlook them if you were consciously looking for ways to make money. whereas if youre young and good at technology your unconscious instincts about what would be interesting to work on are very well aligned with what needs to be built.so theres something like a midwit peak for making money. if you dont need to make much you can work on whatever youre most interested in if you want to become moderately rich you cant usually afford to but if you want to become super rich and youre young and good at technology working on what youre most interested in becomes a good idea again.what if youre not sure what you want what if youre attracted to the idea of making money and more attracted to some kinds of work than others but neither attraction predominates how do you break tiesthe key here is to understand that such ties are only apparent. when you have trouble choosing between following your interests and making money its never because you have complete knowledge of yourself and of the types of work youre choosing between and the options are perfectly balanced. when you cant decide which path to take its almost always due to ignorance. in fact youre usually suffering from three kinds of ignorance simultaneously you dont know what makes you happy what the various kinds of work are really like or how well you could do them. 2in a way this ignorance is excusable. its often hard to predict these things and no one even tells you that you need to. if youre ambitious youre told you should go to college and this is good advice so far as it goes but thats where it usually ends. no one tells you how to figure out what to work on or how hard this can be.what do you do in the face of uncertainty get more certainty. and probably the best way to do that is to try working on things youre interested in. that will get you more information about how interested you are in them how good you are at them and how much scope they offer for ambition.dont wait. dont wait till the end of college to figure out what to work on. dont even wait for internships during college. you dont necessarily need a job doing x in order to work on x often you can just start doing it in some form yourself. and since figuring out what to work on is a problem that could take years to solve the sooner you start the better.one useful trick for judging different kinds of work is to look at who your colleagues will be. youll become like whoever you work with. do you want to become like these peopleindeed the difference in character between different kinds of work is magnified by the fact that everyone else is facing the same decisions as you. if you choose a kind of work mainly for how well it pays youll be surrounded by other people who chose it for the same reason and that will make it even more soulsucking than it seems from the outside. whereas if you choose work youre genuinely interested in youll be surrounded mostly by other people who are genuinely interested in it and that will make it extra inspiring. 3the other thing you do in the face of uncertainty is to make choices that are uncertaintyproof. the less sure you are about what to do the more important it is to choose options that give you more options in the future. i call this staying upwind. if youre unsure whether to major in math or economics for example choose math math is upwind of economics in the sense that it will be easier to switch later from math to economics than from economics to math.theres one case though where its easy to say whether you should work on what interests you the most if you want to do great work. this is not a sufficient condition for doing great work but it is a necessary one.theres a lot of selection bias in advice about whether to follow your passion and this is the reason. most such advice comes from people who are famously successful and if you ask someone whos famously successful how to do what they did most will tell you that you have to work on what youre most interested in. and this is in fact true.that doesnt mean its the right advice for everyone. not everyone can do great work or wants to. but if you do want to the complicated question of whether or not to work on what interests you the most becomes simple. the answer is yes. the root of great work is a sort of ambitious curiosity and you cant manufacture that.

a year ago i noticed a pattern in the least successful startups wed funded they all seemed hard to talk to. it felt as if there was some kind of wall between us. i could never quite tell if they understood what i was saying.this caught my attention because earlier wed noticed a pattern among the most successful startups and it seemed to hinge on a different quality. we found the startups that did best were the ones with the sort of founders about whom wed say they can take care of themselves. the startups that do best are fireandforget in the sense that all you have to do is give them a lead and theyll close it whatever type of lead it is. when theyre raising money for example you can do the initial intros knowing that if you wanted to you could stop thinking about it at that point. you wont have to babysit the round to make sure it happens. that type of founder is going to come back with the money the only question is how much on what terms.it seemed odd that the outliers at the two ends of the spectrum could be detected by what appeared to be unrelated tests. youd expect that if the founders at one end were distinguished by the presence of quality x at the other end theyd be distinguished by lack of x. was there some kind of inverse relation between resourcefulness and being hard to talk toit turns out there is and the key to the mystery is the old adage a word to the wise is sufficient. because this phrase is not only overused but overused in an indirect way by prepending the subject to some advice most people whove heard it dont know what it means. what it means is that if someone is wise all you have to do is say one word to them and theyll understand immediately. you dont have to explain in detail theyll chase down all the implications.in much the same way that all you have to do is give the right sort of founder a one line intro to a vc and hell chase down the money. thats the connection. understanding all the implications  even the inconvenient implications  of what someone tells you is a subset of resourcefulness. its conversational resourcefulness.like real world resourcefulness conversational resourcefulness often means doing things you dont want to. chasing down all the implications of whats said to you can sometimes lead to uncomfortable conclusions. the best word to describe the failure to do so is probably denial though that seems a bit too narrow. a better way to describe the situation would be to say that the unsuccessful founders had the sort of conservatism that comes from weakness. they traversed idea space as gingerly as a very old person traverses the physical world. 1the unsuccessful founders werent stupid. intellectually they were as capable as the successful founders of following all the implications of what one said to them. they just werent eager to.so being hard to talk to was not what was killing the unsuccessful startups. it was a sign of an underlying lack of resourcefulness. thats what was killing them. as well as failing to chase down the implications of what was said to them the unsuccessful founders would also fail to chase down funding and users and sources of new ideas. but the most immediate evidence i had that something was amiss was that i couldnt talk to them.notes1 a yc partner wrotemy feeling with the bad groups is that coming into office hours theyve already decided what theyre going to do and everything i say is being put through an internal process in their heads which either desperately tries to munge what ive said into something that conforms with their decision or just outright dismisses it and creates a rationalization for doing so. they may not even be conscious of this process but thats what i think is happening when you say something to bad groups and they have that glazed over look. i dont think its confusion or lack of understanding per se its this internal process at work.with the good groups you can tell that everything you say is being looked at with fresh eyes and even if its dismissed its because of some logical reason e.g. we already tried that or from speaking to our users that isnt what theyd like etc. those groups never have that glazed over look.

my father is a mathematician. for most of my childhood he worked for westinghouse modelling nuclear reactors.he was one of those lucky people who know early on what they want to do. when you talk to him about his childhood theres a clear watershed at about age 12 when he got interested in maths.he grew up in the small welsh seacoast town of pwllheli. as we retraced his walk to school on google street view he said that it had been nice growing up in the country.didnt it get boring when you got to be about 15 i asked.no he said by then i was interested in maths.in another conversation he told me that what he really liked was solving problems. to me the exercises at the end of each chapter in a math textbook represent work or at best a way to reinforce what you learned in that chapter. to him the problems were the reward. the text of each chapter was just some advice about solving them. he said that as soon as he got a new textbook hed immediately work out all the problems  to the slight annoyance of his teacher since the class was supposed to work through the book gradually.few people know so early or so certainly what they want to work on. but talking to my father reminded me of a heuristic the rest of us can use. if something that seems like work to other people doesnt seem like work to you thats something youre well suited for. for example a lot of programmers i know including me actually like debugging. its not something people tend to volunteer one likes it the way one likes popping zits. but you may have to like debugging to like programming considering the degree to which programming consists of it.the stranger your tastes seem to other people the stronger evidence they probably are of what you should do. when i was in college i used to write papers for my friends. it was quite interesting to write a paper for a class i wasnt taking. plus they were always so relieved.it seemed curious that the same task could be painful to one person and pleasant to another but i didnt realize at the time what this imbalance implied because i wasnt looking for it. i didnt realize how hard it can be to decide what you should work on and that you sometimes have to figure it out from subtle clues like a detective solving a case in a mystery novel. so i bet it would help a lot of people to ask themselves about this explicitly. what seems like work to other people that doesnt seem like work to you

before college the two main things i worked on outside of school were writing and programming. i didnt write essays. i wrote what beginning writers were supposed to write then and probably still are short stories. my stories were awful. they had hardly any plot just characters with strong feelings which i imagined made them deep.the first programs i tried writing were on the ibm 1401 that our school district used for what was then called data processing. this was in 9th grade so i was 13 or 14. the school districts 1401 happened to be in the basement of our junior high school and my friend rich draves and i got permission to use it. it was like a mini bond villains lair down there with all these alienlooking machines  cpu disk drives printer card reader  sitting up on a raised floor under bright fluorescent lights.the language we used was an early version of fortran. you had to type programs on punch cards then stack them in the card reader and press a button to load the program into memory and run it. the result would ordinarily be to print something on the spectacularly loud printer.i was puzzled by the 1401. i couldnt figure out what to do with it. and in retrospect theres not much i could have done with it. the only form of input to programs was data stored on punched cards and i didnt have any data stored on punched cards. the only other option was to do things that didnt rely on any input like calculate approximations of pi but i didnt know enough math to do anything interesting of that type. so im not surprised i cant remember any programs i wrote because they cant have done much. my clearest memory is of the moment i learned it was possible for programs not to terminate when one of mine didnt. on a machine without timesharing this was a social as well as a technical error as the data center managers expression made clear.with microcomputers everything changed. now you could have a computer sitting right in front of you on a desk that could respond to your keystrokes as it was running instead of just churning through a stack of punch cards and then stopping. 1the first of my friends to get a microcomputer built it himself. it was sold as a kit by heathkit. i remember vividly how impressed and envious i felt watching him sitting in front of it typing programs right into the computer.computers were expensive in those days and it took me years of nagging before i convinced my father to buy one a trs80 in about 1980. the gold standard then was the apple ii but a trs80 was good enough. this was when i really started programming. i wrote simple games a program to predict how high my model rockets would fly and a word processor that my father used to write at least one book. there was only room in memory for about 2 pages of text so hed write 2 pages at a time and then print them out but it was a lot better than a typewriter.though i liked programming i didnt plan to study it in college. in college i was going to study philosophy which sounded much more powerful. it seemed to my naive high school self to be the study of the ultimate truths compared to which the things studied in other fields would be mere domain knowledge. what i discovered when i got to college was that the other fields took up so much of the space of ideas that there wasnt much left for these supposed ultimate truths. all that seemed left for philosophy were edge cases that people in other fields felt could safely be ignored.i couldnt have put this into words when i was 18. all i knew at the time was that i kept taking philosophy courses and they kept being boring. so i decided to switch to ai.ai was in the air in the mid 1980s but there were two things especially that made me want to work on it a novel by heinlein called the moon is a harsh mistress which featured an intelligent computer called mike and a pbs documentary that showed terry winograd using shrdlu. i havent tried rereading the moon is a harsh mistress so i dont know how well it has aged but when i read it i was drawn entirely into its world. it seemed only a matter of time before wed have mike and when i saw winograd using shrdlu it seemed like that time would be a few years at most. all you had to do was teach shrdlu more words.there werent any classes in ai at cornell then not even graduate classes so i started trying to teach myself. which meant learning lisp since in those days lisp was regarded as the language of ai. the commonly used programming languages then were pretty primitive and programmers ideas correspondingly so. the default language at cornell was a pascallike language called pli and the situation was similar elsewhere. learning lisp expanded my concept of a program so fast that it was years before i started to have a sense of where the new limits were. this was more like it this was what i had expected college to do. it wasnt happening in a class like it was supposed to but that was ok. for the next couple years i was on a roll. i knew what i was going to do.for my undergraduate thesis i reverseengineered shrdlu. my god did i love working on that program. it was a pleasing bit of code but what made it even more exciting was my belief  hard to imagine now but not unique in 1985  that it was already climbing the lower slopes of intelligence.i had gotten into a program at cornell that didnt make you choose a major. you could take whatever classes you liked and choose whatever you liked to put on your degree. i of course chose artificial intelligence. when i got the actual physical diploma i was dismayed to find that the quotes had been included which made them read as scarequotes. at the time this bothered me but now it seems amusingly accurate for reasons i was about to discover.i applied to 3 grad schools mit and yale which were renowned for ai at the time and harvard which id visited because rich draves went there and was also home to bill woods whod invented the type of parser i used in my shrdlu clone. only harvard accepted me so that was where i went.i dont remember the moment it happened or if there even was a specific moment but during the first year of grad school i realized that ai as practiced at the time was a hoax. by which i mean the sort of ai in which a program thats told the dog is sitting on the chair translates this into some formal representation and adds it to the list of things it knows.what these programs really showed was that theres a subset of natural language thats a formal language. but a very proper subset. it was clear that there was an unbridgeable gap between what they could do and actually understanding natural language. it was not in fact simply a matter of teaching shrdlu more words. that whole way of doing ai with explicit data structures representing concepts was not going to work. its brokenness did as so often happens generate a lot of opportunities to write papers about various bandaids that could be applied to it but it was never going to get us mike.so i looked around to see what i could salvage from the wreckage of my plans and there was lisp. i knew from experience that lisp was interesting for its own sake and not just for its association with ai even though that was the main reason people cared about it at the time. so i decided to focus on lisp. in fact i decided to write a book about lisp hacking. its scary to think how little i knew about lisp hacking when i started writing that book. but theres nothing like writing a book about something to help you learn it. the book on lisp wasnt published till 1993 but i wrote much of it in grad school.computer science is an uneasy alliance between two halves theory and systems. the theory people prove things and the systems people build things. i wanted to build things. i had plenty of respect for theory  indeed a sneaking suspicion that it was the more admirable of the two halves  but building things seemed so much more exciting.the problem with systems work though was that it didnt last. any program you wrote today no matter how good would be obsolete in a couple decades at best. people might mention your software in footnotes but no one would actually use it. and indeed it would seem very feeble work. only people with a sense of the history of the field would even realize that in its time it had been good.there were some surplus xerox dandelions floating around the computer lab at one point. anyone who wanted one to play around with could have one. i was briefly tempted but they were so slow by present standards what was the point no one else wanted one either so off they went. that was what happened to systems work.i wanted not just to build things but to build things that would last.in this dissatisfied state i went in 1988 to visit rich draves at cmu where he was in grad school. one day i went to visit the carnegie institute where id spent a lot of time as a kid. while looking at a painting there i realized something that might seem obvious but was a big surprise to me. there right on the wall was something you could make that would last. paintings didnt become obsolete. some of the best ones were hundreds of years old.and moreover this was something you could make a living doing. not as easily as you could by writing software of course but i thought if you were really industrious and lived really cheaply it had to be possible to make enough to survive. and as an artist you could be truly independent. you wouldnt have a boss or even need to get research funding.i had always liked looking at paintings. could i make them i had no idea. id never imagined it was even possible. i knew intellectually that people made art  that it didnt just appear spontaneously  but it was as if the people who made it were a different species. they either lived long ago or were mysterious geniuses doing strange things in profiles in life magazine. the idea of actually being able to make art to put that verb before that noun seemed almost miraculous.that fall i started taking art classes at harvard. grad students could take classes in any department and my advisor tom cheatham was very easy going. if he even knew about the strange classes i was taking he never said anything.so now i was in a phd program in computer science yet planning to be an artist yet also genuinely in love with lisp hacking and working away at on lisp. in other words like many a grad student i was working energetically on multiple projects that were not my thesis.i didnt see a way out of this situation. i didnt want to drop out of grad school but how else was i going to get out i remember when my friend robert morris got kicked out of cornell for writing the internet worm of 1988 i was envious that hed found such a spectacular way to get out of grad school.then one day in april 1990 a crack appeared in the wall. i ran into professor cheatham and he asked if i was far enough along to graduate that june. i didnt have a word of my dissertation written but in what must have been the quickest bit of thinking in my life i decided to take a shot at writing one in the 5 weeks or so that remained before the deadline reusing parts of on lisp where i could and i was able to respond with no perceptible delay yes i think so. ill give you something to read in a few days.i picked applications of continuations as the topic. in retrospect i should have written about macros and embedded languages. theres a whole world there thats barely been explored. but all i wanted was to get out of grad school and my rapidly written dissertation sufficed just barely.meanwhile i was applying to art schools. i applied to two risd in the us and the accademia di belli arti in florence which because it was the oldest art school i imagined would be good. risd accepted me and i never heard back from the accademia so off to providence i went.id applied for the bfa program at risd which meant in effect that i had to go to college again. this was not as strange as it sounds because i was only 25 and art schools are full of people of different ages. risd counted me as a transfer sophomore and said i had to do the foundation that summer. the foundation means the classes that everyone has to take in fundamental subjects like drawing color and design.toward the end of the summer i got a big surprise a letter from the accademia which had been delayed because theyd sent it to cambridge england instead of cambridge massachusetts inviting me to take the entrance exam in florence that fall. this was now only weeks away. my nice landlady let me leave my stuff in her attic. i had some money saved from consulting work id done in grad school there was probably enough to last a year if i lived cheaply. now all i had to do was learn italian.only stranieri foreigners had to take this entrance exam. in retrospect it may well have been a way of excluding them because there were so many stranieri attracted by the idea of studying art in florence that the italian students would otherwise have been outnumbered. i was in decent shape at painting and drawing from the risd foundation that summer but i still dont know how i managed to pass the written exam. i remember that i answered the essay question by writing about cezanne and that i cranked up the intellectual level as high as i could to make the most of my limited vocabulary. 2im only up to age 25 and already there are such conspicuous patterns. here i was yet again about to attend some august institution in the hopes of learning about some prestigious subject and yet again about to be disappointed. the students and faculty in the painting department at the accademia were the nicest people you could imagine but they had long since arrived at an arrangement whereby the students wouldnt require the faculty to teach anything and in return the faculty wouldnt require the students to learn anything. and at the same time all involved would adhere outwardly to the conventions of a 19th century atelier. we actually had one of those little stoves fed with kindling that you see in 19th century studio paintings and a nude model sitting as close to it as possible without getting burned. except hardly anyone else painted her besides me. the rest of the students spent their time chatting or occasionally trying to imitate things theyd seen in american art magazines.our model turned out to live just down the street from me. she made a living from a combination of modelling and making fakes for a local antique dealer. shed copy an obscure old painting out of a book and then hed take the copy and maltreat it to make it look old. 3while i was a student at the accademia i started painting still lives in my bedroom at night. these paintings were tiny because the room was and because i painted them on leftover scraps of canvas which was all i could afford at the time. painting still lives is different from painting people because the subject as its name suggests cant move. people cant sit for more than about 15 minutes at a time and when they do they dont sit very still. so the traditional m.o. for painting people is to know how to paint a generic person which you then modify to match the specific person youre painting. whereas a still life you can if you want copy pixel by pixel from what youre seeing. you dont want to stop there of course or you get merely photographic accuracy and what makes a still life interesting is that its been through a head. you want to emphasize the visual cues that tell you for example that the reason the color changes suddenly at a certain point is that its the edge of an object. by subtly emphasizing such things you can make paintings that are more realistic than photographs not just in some metaphorical sense but in the strict informationtheoretic sense. 4i liked painting still lives because i was curious about what i was seeing. in everyday life we arent consciously aware of much were seeing. most visual perception is handled by lowlevel processes that merely tell your brain thats a water droplet without telling you details like where the lightest and darkest points are or thats a bush without telling you the shape and position of every leaf. this is a feature of brains not a bug. in everyday life it would be distracting to notice every leaf on every bush. but when you have to paint something you have to look more closely and when you do theres a lot to see. you can still be noticing new things after days of trying to paint something people usually take for granted just as you can after days of trying to write an essay about something people usually take for granted.this is not the only way to paint. im not 100 sure its even a good way to paint. but it seemed a good enough bet to be worth trying.our teacher professor ulivi was a nice guy. he could see i worked hard and gave me a good grade which he wrote down in a sort of passport each student had. but the accademia wasnt teaching me anything except italian and my money was running out so at the end of the first year i went back to the us.i wanted to go back to risd but i was now broke and risd was very expensive so i decided to get a job for a year and then return to risd the next fall. i got one at a company called interleaf which made software for creating documents. you mean like microsoft word exactly. that was how i learned that low end software tends to eat high end software. but interleaf still had a few years to live yet. 5interleaf had done something pretty bold. inspired by emacs theyd added a scripting language and even made the scripting language a dialect of lisp. now they wanted a lisp hacker to write things in it. this was the closest thing ive had to a normal job and i hereby apologize to my boss and coworkers because i was a bad employee. their lisp was the thinnest icing on a giant c cake and since i didnt know c and didnt want to learn it i never understood most of the software. plus i was terribly irresponsible. this was back when a programming job meant showing up every day during certain working hours. that seemed unnatural to me and on this point the rest of the world is coming around to my way of thinking but at the time it caused a lot of friction. toward the end of the year i spent much of my time surreptitiously working on on lisp which i had by this time gotten a contract to publish.the good part was that i got paid huge amounts of money especially by art student standards. in florence after paying my part of the rent my budget for everything else had been 7 a day. now i was getting paid more than 4 times that every hour even when i was just sitting in a meeting. by living cheaply i not only managed to save enough to go back to risd but also paid off my college loans.i learned some useful things at interleaf though they were mostly about what not to do. i learned that its better for technology companies to be run by product people than sales people though sales is a real skill and people who are good at it are really good at it that it leads to bugs when code is edited by too many people that cheap office space is no bargain if its depressing that planned meetings are inferior to corridor conversations that big bureaucratic customers are a dangerous source of money and that theres not much overlap between conventional office hours and the optimal time for hacking or conventional offices and the optimal place for it.but the most important thing i learned and which i used in both viaweb and y combinator is that the low end eats the high end that its good to be the entry level option even though that will be less prestigious because if youre not someone else will be and will squash you against the ceiling. which in turn means that prestige is a danger sign.when i left to go back to risd the next fall i arranged to do freelance work for the group that did projects for customers and this was how i survived for the next several years. when i came back to visit for a project later on someone told me about a new thing called html which was as he described it a derivative of sgml. markup language enthusiasts were an occupational hazard at interleaf and i ignored him but this html thing later became a big part of my life.in the fall of 1992 i moved back to providence to continue at risd. the foundation had merely been intro stuff and the accademia had been a very civilized joke. now i was going to see what real art school was like. but alas it was more like the accademia than not. better organized certainly and a lot more expensive but it was now becoming clear that art school did not bear the same relationship to art that medical school bore to medicine. at least not the painting department. the textile department which my next door neighbor belonged to seemed to be pretty rigorous. no doubt illustration and architecture were too. but painting was postrigorous. painting students were supposed to express themselves which to the more worldly ones meant to try to cook up some sort of distinctive signature style.a signature style is the visual equivalent of what in show business is known as a schtick something that immediately identifies the work as yours and no one elses. for example when you see a painting that looks like a certain kind of cartoon you know its by roy lichtenstein. so if you see a big painting of this type hanging in the apartment of a hedge fund manager you know he paid millions of dollars for it. thats not always why artists have a signature style but its usually why buyers pay a lot for such work. 6there were plenty of earnest students too kids who could draw in high school and now had come to what was supposed to be the best art school in the country to learn to draw even better. they tended to be confused and demoralized by what they found at risd but they kept going because painting was what they did. i was not one of the kids who could draw in high school but at risd i was definitely closer to their tribe than the tribe of signature style seekers.i learned a lot in the color class i took at risd but otherwise i was basically teaching myself to paint and i could do that for free. so in 1993 i dropped out. i hung around providence for a bit and then my college friend nancy parmet did me a big favor. a rentcontrolled apartment in a building her mother owned in new york was becoming vacant. did i want it it wasnt much more than my current place and new york was supposed to be where the artists were. so yes i wanted it 7asterix comics begin by zooming in on a tiny corner of roman gaul that turns out not to be controlled by the romans. you can do something similar on a map of new york city if you zoom in on the upper east side theres a tiny corner thats not rich or at least wasnt in 1993. its called yorkville and that was my new home. now i was a new york artist  in the strictly technical sense of making paintings and living in new york.i was nervous about money because i could sense that interleaf was on the way down. freelance lisp hacking work was very rare and i didnt want to have to program in another language which in those days would have meant c if i was lucky. so with my unerring nose for financial opportunity i decided to write another book on lisp. this would be a popular book the sort of book that could be used as a textbook. i imagined myself living frugally off the royalties and spending all my time painting. the painting on the cover of this book ansi common lisp is one that i painted around this time.the best thing about new york for me was the presence of idelle and julian weber. idelle weber was a painter one of the early photorealists and id taken her painting class at harvard. ive never known a teacher more beloved by her students. large numbers of former students kept in touch with her including me. after i moved to new york i became her de facto studio assistant.she liked to paint on big square canvases 4 to 5 feet on a side. one day in late 1994 as i was stretching one of these monsters there was something on the radio about a famous fund manager. he wasnt that much older than me and was super rich. the thought suddenly occurred to me why dont i become rich then ill be able to work on whatever i want.meanwhile id been hearing more and more about this new thing called the world wide web. robert morris showed it to me when i visited him in cambridge where he was now in grad school at harvard. it seemed to me that the web would be a big deal. id seen what graphical user interfaces had done for the popularity of microcomputers. it seemed like the web would do the same for the internet.if i wanted to get rich here was the next train leaving the station. i was right about that part. what i got wrong was the idea. i decided we should start a company to put art galleries online. i cant honestly say after reading so many y combinator applications that this was the worst startup idea ever but it was up there. art galleries didnt want to be online and still dont not the fancy ones. thats not how they sell. i wrote some software to generate web sites for galleries and robert wrote some to resize images and set up an http server to serve the pages. then we tried to sign up galleries. to call this a difficult sale would be an understatement. it was difficult to give away. a few galleries let us make sites for them for free but none paid us.then some online stores started to appear and i realized that except for the order buttons they were identical to the sites wed been generating for galleries. this impressivesounding thing called an internet storefront was something we already knew how to build.so in the summer of 1995 after i submitted the cameraready copy of ansi common lisp to the publishers we started trying to write software to build online stores. at first this was going to be normal desktop software which in those days meant windows software. that was an alarming prospect because neither of us knew how to write windows software or wanted to learn. we lived in the unix world. but we decided wed at least try writing a prototype store builder on unix. robert wrote a shopping cart and i wrote a new site generator for stores  in lisp of course.we were working out of roberts apartment in cambridge. his roommate was away for big chunks of time during which i got to sleep in his room. for some reason there was no bed frame or sheets just a mattress on the floor. one morning as i was lying on this mattress i had an idea that made me sit up like a capital l. what if we ran the software on the server and let users control it by clicking on links then wed never have to write anything to run on users computers. we could generate the sites on the same server wed serve them from. users wouldnt need anything more than a browser.this kind of software known as a web app is common now but at the time it wasnt clear that it was even possible. to find out we decided to try making a version of our store builder that you could control through the browser. a couple days later on august 12 we had one that worked. the ui was horrible but it proved you could build a whole store through the browser without any client software or typing anything into the command line on the server.now we felt like we were really onto something. i had visions of a whole new generation of software working this way. you wouldnt need versions or ports or any of that crap. at interleaf there had been a whole group called release engineering that seemed to be at least as big as the group that actually wrote the software. now you could just update the software right on the server.we started a new company we called viaweb after the fact that our software worked via the web and we got 10000 in seed funding from idelles husband julian. in return for that and doing the initial legal work and giving us business advice we gave him 10 of the company. ten years later this deal became the model for y combinators. we knew founders needed something like this because wed needed it ourselves.at this stage i had a negative net worth because the thousand dollars or so i had in the bank was more than counterbalanced by what i owed the government in taxes. had i diligently set aside the proper proportion of the money id made consulting for interleaf no i had not. so although robert had his graduate student stipend i needed that seed funding to live on.we originally hoped to launch in september but we got more ambitious about the software as we worked on it. eventually we managed to build a wysiwyg site builder in the sense that as you were creating pages they looked exactly like the static ones that would be generated later except that instead of leading to static pages the links all referred to closures stored in a hash table on the server.it helped to have studied art because the main goal of an online store builder is to make users look legit and the key to looking legit is high production values. if you get page layouts and fonts and colors right you can make a guy running a store out of his bedroom look more legit than a big company.if youre curious why my site looks so oldfashioned its because its still made with this software. it may look clunky today but in 1996 it was the last word in slick.in september robert rebelled. weve been working on this for a month he said and its still not done. this is funny in retrospect because he would still be working on it almost 3 years later. but i decided it might be prudent to recruit more programmers and i asked robert who else in grad school with him was really good. he recommended trevor blackwell which surprised me at first because at that point i knew trevor mainly for his plan to reduce everything in his life to a stack of notecards which he carried around with him. but rtm was right as usual. trevor turned out to be a frighteningly effective hacker.it was a lot of fun working with robert and trevor. theyre the two most independentminded people i know and in completely different ways. if you could see inside rtms brain it would look like a colonial new england church and if you could see inside trevors it would look like the worst excesses of austrian rococo.we opened for business with 6 stores in january 1996. it was just as well we waited a few months because although we worried we were late we were actually almost fatally early. there was a lot of talk in the press then about ecommerce but not many people actually wanted online stores. 8there were three main parts to the software the editor which people used to build sites and which i wrote the shopping cart which robert wrote and the manager which kept track of orders and statistics and which trevor wrote. in its time the editor was one of the best generalpurpose site builders. i kept the code tight and didnt have to integrate with any other software except roberts and trevors so it was quite fun to work on. if all id had to do was work on this software the next 3 years would have been the easiest of my life. unfortunately i had to do a lot more all of it stuff i was worse at than programming and the next 3 years were instead the most stressful.there were a lot of startups making ecommerce software in the second half of the 90s. we were determined to be the microsoft word not the interleaf. which meant being easy to use and inexpensive. it was lucky for us that we were poor because that caused us to make viaweb even more inexpensive than we realized. we charged 100 a month for a small store and 300 a month for a big one. this low price was a big attraction and a constant thorn in the sides of competitors but it wasnt because of some clever insight that we set the price low. we had no idea what businesses paid for things. 300 a month seemed like a lot of money to us.we did a lot of things right by accident like that. for example we did whats now called doing things that dont scale although at the time we would have described it as being so lame that were driven to the most desperate measures to get users. the most common of which was building stores for them. this seemed particularly humiliating since the whole raison detre of our software was that people could use it to make their own stores. but anything to get users.we learned a lot more about retail than we wanted to know. for example that if you could only have a small image of a mans shirt and all images were small then by present standards it was better to have a closeup of the collar than a picture of the whole shirt. the reason i remember learning this was that it meant i had to rescan about 30 images of mens shirts. my first set of scans were so beautiful too.though this felt wrong it was exactly the right thing to be doing. building stores for users taught us about retail and about how it felt to use our software. i was initially both mystified and repelled by business and thought we needed a business person to be in charge of it but once we started to get users i was converted in much the same way i was converted to fatherhood once i had kids. whatever users wanted i was all theirs. maybe one day wed have so many users that i couldnt scan their images for them but in the meantime there was nothing more important to do.another thing i didnt get at the time is that growth rate is the ultimate test of a startup. our growth rate was fine. we had about 70 stores at the end of 1996 and about 500 at the end of 1997. i mistakenly thought the thing that mattered was the absolute number of users. and that is the thing that matters in the sense that thats how much money youre making and if youre not making enough you might go out of business. but in the long term the growth rate takes care of the absolute number. if wed been a startup i was advising at y combinator i would have said stop being so stressed out because youre doing fine. youre growing 7x a year. just dont hire too many more people and youll soon be profitable and then youll control your own destiny.alas i hired lots more people partly because our investors wanted me to and partly because thats what startups did during the internet bubble. a company with just a handful of employees would have seemed amateurish. so we didnt reach breakeven until about when yahoo bought us in the summer of 1998. which in turn meant we were at the mercy of investors for the entire life of the company. and since both we and our investors were noobs at startups the result was a mess even by startup standards.it was a huge relief when yahoo bought us. in principle our viaweb stock was valuable. it was a share in a business that was profitable and growing rapidly. but it didnt feel very valuable to me i had no idea how to value a business but i was all too keenly aware of the neardeath experiences we seemed to have every few months. nor had i changed my grad student lifestyle significantly since we started. so when yahoo bought us it felt like going from rags to riches. since we were going to california i bought a car a yellow 1998 vw gti. i remember thinking that its leather seats alone were by far the most luxurious thing i owned.the next year from the summer of 1998 to the summer of 1999 must have been the least productive of my life. i didnt realize it at the time but i was worn out from the effort and stress of running viaweb. for a while after i got to california i tried to continue my usual m.o. of programming till 3 in the morning but fatigue combined with yahoos prematurely aged culture and grim cube farm in santa clara gradually dragged me down. after a few months it felt disconcertingly like working at interleaf.yahoo had given us a lot of options when they bought us. at the time i thought yahoo was so overvalued that theyd never be worth anything but to my astonishment the stock went up 5x in the next year. i hung on till the first chunk of options vested then in the summer of 1999 i left. it had been so long since id painted anything that id half forgotten why i was doing this. my brain had been entirely full of software and mens shirts for 4 years. but i had done this to get rich so i could paint i reminded myself and now i was rich so i should go paint.when i said i was leaving my boss at yahoo had a long conversation with me about my plans. i told him all about the kinds of pictures i wanted to paint. at the time i was touched that he took such an interest in me. now i realize it was because he thought i was lying. my options at that point were worth about 2 million a month. if i was leaving that kind of money on the table it could only be to go and start some new startup and if i did i might take people with me. this was the height of the internet bubble and yahoo was ground zero of it. my boss was at that moment a billionaire. leaving then to start a new startup must have seemed to him an insanely and yet also plausibly ambitious plan.but i really was quitting to paint and i started immediately. there was no time to lose. id already burned 4 years getting rich. now when i talk to founders who are leaving after selling their companies my advice is always the same take a vacation. thats what i should have done just gone off somewhere and done nothing for a month or two but the idea never occurred to me.so i tried to paint but i just didnt seem to have any energy or ambition. part of the problem was that i didnt know many people in california. id compounded this problem by buying a house up in the santa cruz mountains with a beautiful view but miles from anywhere. i stuck it out for a few more months then in desperation i went back to new york where unless you understand about rent control youll be surprised to hear i still had my apartment sealed up like a tomb of my old life. idelle was in new york at least and there were other people trying to paint there even though i didnt know any of them.when i got back to new york i resumed my old life except now i was rich. it was as weird as it sounds. i resumed all my old patterns except now there were doors where there hadnt been. now when i was tired of walking all i had to do was raise my hand and unless it was raining a taxi would stop to pick me up. now when i walked past charming little restaurants i could go in and order lunch. it was exciting for a while. painting started to go better. i experimented with a new kind of still life where id paint one painting in the old way then photograph it and print it blown up on canvas and then use that as the underpainting for a second still life painted from the same objects which hopefully hadnt rotted yet.meanwhile i looked for an apartment to buy. now i could actually choose what neighborhood to live in. where i asked myself and various real estate agents is the cambridge of new york aided by occasional visits to actual cambridge i gradually realized there wasnt one. huh.around this time in the spring of 2000 i had an idea. it was clear from our experience with viaweb that web apps were the future. why not build a web app for making web apps why not let people edit code on our server through the browser and then host the resulting applications for them 9 you could run all sorts of services on the servers that these applications could use just by making an api call making and receiving phone calls manipulating images taking credit card payments etc.i got so excited about this idea that i couldnt think about anything else. it seemed obvious that this was the future. i didnt particularly want to start another company but it was clear that this idea would have to be embodied as one so i decided to move to cambridge and start it. i hoped to lure robert into working on it with me but there i ran into a hitch. robert was now a postdoc at mit and though hed made a lot of money the last time id lured him into working on one of my schemes it had also been a huge time sink. so while he agreed that it sounded like a plausible idea he firmly refused to work on it.hmph. well id do it myself then. i recruited dan giffin who had worked for viaweb and two undergrads who wanted summer jobs and we got to work trying to build what its now clear is about twenty companies and several open source projects worth of software. the language for defining applications would of course be a dialect of lisp. but i wasnt so naive as to assume i could spring an overt lisp on a general audience wed hide the parentheses like dylan did.by then there was a name for the kind of company viaweb was an application service provider or asp. this name didnt last long before it was replaced by software as a service but it was current for long enough that i named this new company after it it was going to be called aspra.i started working on the application builder dan worked on network infrastructure and the two undergrads worked on the first two services images and phone calls. but about halfway through the summer i realized i really didnt want to run a company  especially not a big one which it was looking like this would have to be. id only started viaweb because i needed the money. now that i didnt need money anymore why was i doing this if this vision had to be realized as a company then screw the vision. id build a subset that could be done as an open source project.much to my surprise the time i spent working on this stuff was not wasted after all. after we started y combinator i would often encounter startups working on parts of this new architecture and it was very useful to have spent so much time thinking about it and even trying to write some of it.the subset i would build as an open source project was the new lisp whose parentheses i now wouldnt even have to hide. a lot of lisp hackers dream of building a new lisp partly because one of the distinctive features of the language is that it has dialects and partly i think because we have in our minds a platonic form of lisp that all existing dialects fall short of. i certainly did. so at the end of the summer dan and i switched to working on this new dialect of lisp which i called arc in a house i bought in cambridge.the following spring lightning struck. i was invited to give a talk at a lisp conference so i gave one about how wed used lisp at viaweb. afterward i put a postscript file of this talk online on paulgraham.com which id created years before using viaweb but had never used for anything. in one day it got 30000 page views. what on earth had happened the referring urls showed that someone had posted it on slashdot. 10wow i thought theres an audience. if i write something and put it on the web anyone can read it. that may seem obvious now but it was surprising then. in the print era there was a narrow channel to readers guarded by fierce monsters known as editors. the only way to get an audience for anything you wrote was to get it published as a book or in a newspaper or magazine. now anyone could publish anything.this had been possible in principle since 1993 but not many people had realized it yet. i had been intimately involved with building the infrastructure of the web for most of that time and a writer as well and it had taken me 8 years to realize it. even then it took me several years to understand the implications. it meant there would be a whole new generation of essays. 11in the print era the channel for publishing essays had been vanishingly small. except for a few officially anointed thinkers who went to the right parties in new york the only people allowed to publish essays were specialists writing about their specialties. there were so many essays that had never been written because there had been no way to publish them. now they could be and i was going to write them. 12ive worked on several different things but to the extent there was a turning point where i figured out what to work on it was when i started publishing essays online. from then on i knew that whatever else i did id always write essays too.i knew that online essays would be a marginal medium at first. socially theyd seem more like rants posted by nutjobs on their geocities sites than the genteel and beautifully typeset compositions published in the new yorker. but by this point i knew enough to find that encouraging instead of discouraging.one of the most conspicuous patterns ive noticed in my life is how well it has worked for me at least to work on things that werent prestigious. still life has always been the least prestigious form of painting. viaweb and y combinator both seemed lame when we started them. i still get the glassy eye from strangers when they ask what im writing and i explain that its an essay im going to publish on my web site. even lisp though prestigious intellectually in something like the way latin is also seems about as hip.its not that unprestigious types of work are good per se. but when you find yourself drawn to some kind of work despite its current lack of prestige its a sign both that theres something real to be discovered there and that you have the right kind of motives. impure motives are a big danger for the ambitious. if anything is going to lead you astray it will be the desire to impress people. so while working on things that arent prestigious doesnt guarantee youre on the right track it at least guarantees youre not on the most common type of wrong one.over the next several years i wrote lots of essays about all kinds of different topics. oreilly reprinted a collection of them as a book called hackers  painters after one of the essays in it. i also worked on spam filters and did some more painting. i used to have dinners for a group of friends every thursday night which taught me how to cook for groups. and i bought another building in cambridge a former candy factory and later twas said porn studio to use as an office.one night in october 2003 there was a big party at my house. it was a clever idea of my friend maria daniels who was one of the thursday diners. three separate hosts would all invite their friends to one party. so for every guest two thirds of the other guests would be people they didnt know but would probably like. one of the guests was someone i didnt know but would turn out to like a lot a woman called jessica livingston. a couple days later i asked her out.jessica was in charge of marketing at a boston investment bank. this bank thought it understood startups but over the next year as she met friends of mine from the startup world she was surprised how different reality was. and how colorful their stories were. so she decided to compile a book of interviews with startup founders.when the bank had financial problems and she had to fire half her staff she started looking for a new job. in early 2005 she interviewed for a marketing job at a boston vc firm. it took them weeks to make up their minds and during this time i started telling her about all the things that needed to be fixed about venture capital. they should make a larger number of smaller investments instead of a handful of giant ones they should be funding younger more technical founders instead of mbas they should let the founders remain as ceo and so on.one of my tricks for writing essays had always been to give talks. the prospect of having to stand up in front of a group of people and tell them something that wont waste their time is a great spur to the imagination. when the harvard computer society the undergrad computer club asked me to give a talk i decided i would tell them how to start a startup. maybe theyd be able to avoid the worst of the mistakes wed made.so i gave this talk in the course of which i told them that the best sources of seed funding were successful startup founders because then theyd be sources of advice too. whereupon it seemed they were all looking expectantly at me. horrified at the prospect of having my inbox flooded by business plans if id only known i blurted out but not me and went on with the talk. but afterward it occurred to me that i should really stop procrastinating about angel investing. id been meaning to since yahoo bought us and now it was 7 years later and i still hadnt done one angel investment.meanwhile i had been scheming with robert and trevor about projects we could work on together. i missed working with them and it seemed like there had to be something we could collaborate on.as jessica and i were walking home from dinner on march 11 at the corner of garden and walker streets these three threads converged. screw the vcs who were taking so long to make up their minds. wed start our own investment firm and actually implement the ideas wed been talking about. id fund it and jessica could quit her job and work for it and wed get robert and trevor as partners too. 13once again ignorance worked in our favor. we had no idea how to be angel investors and in boston in 2005 there were no ron conways to learn from. so we just made what seemed like the obvious choices and some of the things we did turned out to be novel.there are multiple components to y combinator and we didnt figure them all out at once. the part we got first was to be an angel firm. in those days those two words didnt go together. there were vc firms which were organized companies with people whose job it was to make investments but they only did big million dollar investments. and there were angels who did smaller investments but these were individuals who were usually focused on other things and made investments on the side. and neither of them helped founders enough in the beginning. we knew how helpless founders were in some respects because we remembered how helpless wed been. for example one thing julian had done for us that seemed to us like magic was to get us set up as a company. we were fine writing fairly difficult software but actually getting incorporated with bylaws and stock and all that stuff how on earth did you do that our plan was not only to make seed investments but to do for startups everything julian had done for us.yc was not organized as a fund. it was cheap enough to run that we funded it with our own money. that went right by 99 of readers but professional investors are thinking wow that means they got all the returns. but once again this was not due to any particular insight on our part. we didnt know how vc firms were organized. it never occurred to us to try to raise a fund and if it had we wouldnt have known where to start. 14the most distinctive thing about yc is the batch model to fund a bunch of startups all at once twice a year and then to spend three months focusing intensively on trying to help them. that part we discovered by accident not merely implicitly but explicitly due to our ignorance about investing. we needed to get experience as investors. what better way we thought than to fund a whole bunch of startups at once we knew undergrads got temporary jobs at tech companies during the summer. why not organize a summer program where theyd start startups instead we wouldnt feel guilty for being in a sense fake investors because they would in a similar sense be fake founders. so while we probably wouldnt make much money out of it wed at least get to practice being investors on them and they for their part would probably have a more interesting summer than they would working at microsoft.wed use the building i owned in cambridge as our headquarters. wed all have dinner there once a week  on tuesdays since i was already cooking for the thursday diners on thursdays  and after dinner wed bring in experts on startups to give talks.we knew undergrads were deciding then about summer jobs so in a matter of days we cooked up something we called the summer founders program and i posted an announcement on my site inviting undergrads to apply. i had never imagined that writing essays would be a way to get deal flow as investors call it but it turned out to be the perfect source. 15 we got 225 applications for the summer founders program and we were surprised to find that a lot of them were from people whod already graduated or were about to that spring. already this sfp thing was starting to feel more serious than wed intended.we invited about 20 of the 225 groups to interview in person and from those we picked 8 to fund. they were an impressive group. that first batch included reddit justin kan and emmett shear who went on to found twitch aaron swartz who had already helped write the rss spec and would a few years later become a martyr for open access and sam altman who would later become the second president of yc. i dont think it was entirely luck that the first batch was so good. you had to be pretty bold to sign up for a weird thing like the summer founders program instead of a summer job at a legit place like microsoft or goldman sachs.the deal for startups was based on a combination of the deal we did with julian 10k for 10 and what robert said mit grad students got for the summer 6k. we invested 6k per founder which in the typical twofounder case was 12k in return for 6. that had to be fair because it was twice as good as the deal we ourselves had taken. plus that first summer which was really hot jessica brought the founders free air conditioners. 16fairly quickly i realized that we had stumbled upon the way to scale startup funding. funding startups in batches was more convenient for us because it meant we could do things for a lot of startups at once but being part of a batch was better for the startups too. it solved one of the biggest problems faced by founders the isolation. now you not only had colleagues but colleagues who understood the problems you were facing and could tell you how they were solving them.as yc grew we started to notice other advantages of scale. the alumni became a tight community dedicated to helping one another and especially the current batch whose shoes they remembered being in. we also noticed that the startups were becoming one anothers customers. we used to refer jokingly to the yc gdp but as yc grows this becomes less and less of a joke. now lots of startups get their initial set of customers almost entirely from among their batchmates.i had not originally intended yc to be a fulltime job. i was going to do three things hack write essays and work on yc. as yc grew and i grew more excited about it it started to take up a lot more than a third of my attention. but for the first few years i was still able to work on other things.in the summer of 2006 robert and i started working on a new version of arc. this one was reasonably fast because it was compiled into scheme. to test this new arc i wrote hacker news in it. it was originally meant to be a news aggregator for startup founders and was called startup news but after a few months i got tired of reading about nothing but startups. plus it wasnt startup founders we wanted to reach. it was future startup founders. so i changed the name to hacker news and the topic to whatever engaged ones intellectual curiosity.hn was no doubt good for yc but it was also by far the biggest source of stress for me. if all id had to do was select and help founders life would have been so easy. and that implies that hn was a mistake. surely the biggest source of stress in ones work should at least be something close to the core of the work. whereas i was like someone who was in pain while running a marathon not from the exertion of running but because i had a blister from an illfitting shoe. when i was dealing with some urgent problem during yc there was about a 60 chance it had to do with hn and a 40 chance it had do with everything else combined. 17as well as hn i wrote all of ycs internal software in arc. but while i continued to work a good deal in arc i gradually stopped working on arc partly because i didnt have time to and partly because it was a lot less attractive to mess around with the language now that we had all this infrastructure depending on it. so now my three projects were reduced to two writing essays and working on yc.yc was different from other kinds of work ive done. instead of deciding for myself what to work on the problems came to me. every 6 months there was a new batch of startups and their problems whatever they were became our problems. it was very engaging work because their problems were quite varied and the good founders were very effective. if you were trying to learn the most you could about startups in the shortest possible time you couldnt have picked a better way to do it.there were parts of the job i didnt like. disputes between cofounders figuring out when people were lying to us fighting with people who maltreated the startups and so on. but i worked hard even at the parts i didnt like. i was haunted by something kevin hale once said about companies no one works harder than the boss. he meant it both descriptively and prescriptively and it was the second part that scared me. i wanted yc to be good so if how hard i worked set the upper bound on how hard everyone else worked id better work very hard.one day in 2010 when he was visiting california for interviews robert morris did something astonishing he offered me unsolicited advice. i can only remember him doing that once before. one day at viaweb when i was bent over double from a kidney stone he suggested that it would be a good idea for him to take me to the hospital. that was what it took for rtm to offer unsolicited advice. so i remember his exact words very clearly. you know he said you should make sure y combinator isnt the last cool thing you do.at the time i didnt understand what he meant but gradually it dawned on me that he was saying i should quit. this seemed strange advice because yc was doing great. but if there was one thing rarer than rtm offering advice it was rtm being wrong. so this set me thinking. it was true that on my current trajectory yc would be the last thing i did because it was only taking up more of my attention. it had already eaten arc and was in the process of eating essays too. either yc was my lifes work or id have to leave eventually. and it wasnt so i would.in the summer of 2012 my mother had a stroke and the cause turned out to be a blood clot caused by colon cancer. the stroke destroyed her balance and she was put in a nursing home but she really wanted to get out of it and back to her house and my sister and i were determined to help her do it. i used to fly up to oregon to visit her regularly and i had a lot of time to think on those flights. on one of them i realized i was ready to hand yc over to someone else.i asked jessica if she wanted to be president but she didnt so we decided wed try to recruit sam altman. we talked to robert and trevor and we agreed to make it a complete changing of the guard. up till that point yc had been controlled by the original llc we four had started. but we wanted yc to last for a long time and to do that it couldnt be controlled by the founders. so if sam said yes wed let him reorganize yc. robert and i would retire and jessica and trevor would become ordinary partners.when we asked sam if he wanted to be president of yc initially he said no. he wanted to start a startup to make nuclear reactors. but i kept at it and in october 2013 he finally agreed. we decided hed take over starting with the winter 2014 batch. for the rest of 2013 i left running yc more and more to sam partly so he could learn the job and partly because i was focused on my mother whose cancer had returned.she died on january 15 2014. we knew this was coming but it was still hard when it did.i kept working on yc till march to help get that batch of startups through demo day then i checked out pretty completely. i still talk to alumni and to new startups working on things im interested in but that only takes a few hours a week.what should i do next rtms advice hadnt included anything about that. i wanted to do something completely different so i decided id paint. i wanted to see how good i could get if i really focused on it. so the day after i stopped working on yc i started painting. i was rusty and it took a while to get back into shape but it was at least completely engaging. 18i spent most of the rest of 2014 painting. id never been able to work so uninterruptedly before and i got to be better than i had been. not good enough but better. then in november right in the middle of a painting i ran out of steam. up till that point id always been curious to see how the painting i was working on would turn out but suddenly finishing this one seemed like a chore. so i stopped working on it and cleaned my brushes and havent painted since. so far anyway.i realize that sounds rather wimpy. but attention is a zero sum game. if you can choose what to work on and you choose a project thats not the best one or at least a good one for you then its getting in the way of another project that is. and at 50 there was some opportunity cost to screwing around.i started writing essays again and wrote a bunch of new ones over the next few months. i even wrote a couple that werent about startups. then in march 2015 i started working on lisp again.the distinctive thing about lisp is that its core is a language defined by writing an interpreter in itself. it wasnt originally intended as a programming language in the ordinary sense. it was meant to be a formal model of computation an alternative to the turing machine. if you want to write an interpreter for a language in itself whats the minimum set of predefined operators you need the lisp that john mccarthy invented or more accurately discovered is an answer to that question. 19mccarthy didnt realize this lisp could even be used to program computers till his grad student steve russell suggested it. russell translated mccarthys interpreter into ibm 704 machine language and from that point lisp started also to be a programming language in the ordinary sense. but its origins as a model of computation gave it a power and elegance that other languages couldnt match. it was this that attracted me in college though i didnt understand why at the time.mccarthys 1960 lisp did nothing more than interpret lisp expressions. it was missing a lot of things youd want in a programming language. so these had to be added and when they were they werent defined using mccarthys original axiomatic approach. that wouldnt have been feasible at the time. mccarthy tested his interpreter by handsimulating the execution of programs. but it was already getting close to the limit of interpreters you could test that way  indeed there was a bug in it that mccarthy had overlooked. to test a more complicated interpreter youd have had to run it and computers then werent powerful enough.now they are though. now you could continue using mccarthys axiomatic approach till youd defined a complete programming language. and as long as every change you made to mccarthys lisp was a discoverednesspreserving transformation you could in principle end up with a complete language that had this quality. harder to do than to talk about of course but if it was possible in principle why not try so i decided to take a shot at it. it took 4 years from march 26 2015 to october 12 2019. it was fortunate that i had a precisely defined goal or it would have been hard to keep at it for so long.i wrote this new lisp called bel in itself in arc. that may sound like a contradiction but its an indication of the sort of trickery i had to engage in to make this work. by means of an egregious collection of hacks i managed to make something close enough to an interpreter written in itself that could actually run. not fast but fast enough to test.i had to ban myself from writing essays during most of this time or id never have finished. in late 2015 i spent 3 months writing essays and when i went back to working on bel i could barely understand the code. not so much because it was badly written as because the problem is so convoluted. when youre working on an interpreter written in itself its hard to keep track of whats happening at what level and errors can be practically encrypted by the time you get them.so i said no more essays till bel was done. but i told few people about bel while i was working on it. so for years it must have seemed that i was doing nothing when in fact i was working harder than id ever worked on anything. occasionally after wrestling for hours with some gruesome bug id check twitter or hn and see someone asking does paul graham still codeworking on bel was hard but satisfying. i worked on it so intensively that at any given time i had a decent chunk of the code in my head and could write more there. i remember taking the boys to the coast on a sunny day in 2015 and figuring out how to deal with some problem involving continuations while i watched them play in the tide pools. it felt like i was doing life right. i remember that because i was slightly dismayed at how novel it felt. the good news is that i had more moments like this over the next few years.in the summer of 2016 we moved to england. we wanted our kids to see what it was like living in another country and since i was a british citizen by birth that seemed the obvious choice. we only meant to stay for a year but we liked it so much that we still live there. so most of bel was written in england.in the fall of 2019 bel was finally finished. like mccarthys original lisp its a spec rather than an implementation although like mccarthys lisp its a spec expressed as code.now that i could write essays again i wrote a bunch about topics id had stacked up. i kept writing essays through 2020 but i also started to think about other things i could work on. how should i choose what to do well how had i chosen what to work on in the past i wrote an essay for myself to answer that question and i was surprised how long and messy the answer turned out to be. if this surprised me whod lived it then i thought perhaps it would be interesting to other people and encouraging to those with similarly messy lives. so i wrote a more detailed version for others to read and this is the last sentence of it.notes1 my experience skipped a step in the evolution of computers timesharing machines with interactive oses. i went straight from batch processing to microcomputers which made microcomputers seem all the more exciting.2 italian words for abstract concepts can nearly always be predicted from their english cognates except for occasional traps like polluzione. its the everyday words that differ. so if you string together a lot of abstract concepts with a few simple verbs you can make a little italian go a long way.3 i lived at piazza san felice 4 so my walk to the accademia went straight down the spine of old florence past the pitti across the bridge past orsanmichele between the duomo and the baptistery and then up via ricasoli to piazza san marco. i saw florence at street level in every possible condition from empty dark winter evenings to sweltering summer days when the streets were packed with tourists.4 you can of course paint people like still lives if you want to and theyre willing. that sort of portrait is arguably the apex of still life painting though the long sitting does tend to produce pained expressions in the sitters.5 interleaf was one of many companies that had smart people and built impressive technology and yet got crushed by moores law. in the 1990s the exponential growth in the power of commodity i.e. intel processors rolled up highend specialpurpose hardware and software companies like a bulldozer.6 the signature style seekers at risd werent specifically mercenary. in the art world money and coolness are tightly coupled. anything expensive comes to be seen as cool and anything seen as cool will soon become equally expensive.7 technically the apartment wasnt rentcontrolled but rentstabilized but this is a refinement only new yorkers would know or care about. the point is that it was really cheap less than half market price.8 most software you can launch as soon as its done. but when the software is an online store builder and youre hosting the stores if you dont have any users yet that fact will be painfully obvious. so before we could launch publicly we had to launch privately in the sense of recruiting an initial set of users and making sure they had decentlooking stores.9 wed had a code editor in viaweb for users to define their own page styles. they didnt know it but they were editing lisp expressions underneath. but this wasnt an app editor because the code ran when the merchants sites were generated not when shoppers visited them.10 this was the first instance of what is now a familiar experience and so was what happened next when i read the comments and found they were full of angry people. how could i claim that lisp was better than other languages werent they all turing complete people who see the responses to essays i write sometimes tell me how sorry they feel for me but im not exaggerating when i reply that it has always been like this since the very beginning. it comes with the territory. an essay must tell readers things they dont already know and some people dislike being told such things.11 people put plenty of stuff on the internet in the 90s of course but putting something online is not the same as publishing it online. publishing online means you treat the online version as the or at least a primary version.12 there is a general lesson here that our experience with y combinator also teaches customs continue to constrain you long after the restrictions that caused them have disappeared. customary vc practice had once like the customs about publishing essays been based on real constraints. startups had once been much more expensive to start and proportionally rare. now they could be cheap and common but the vcs customs still reflected the old world just as customs about writing essays still reflected the constraints of the print era.which in turn implies that people who are independentminded i.e. less influenced by custom will have an advantage in fields affected by rapid change where customs are more likely to be obsolete.heres an interesting point though you cant always predict which fields will be affected by rapid change. obviously software and venture capital will be but who would have predicted that essay writing would be13 y combinator was not the original name. at first we were called cambridge seed. but we didnt want a regional name in case someone copied us in silicon valley so we renamed ourselves after one of the coolest tricks in the lambda calculus the y combinator.i picked orange as our color partly because its the warmest and partly because no vc used it. in 2005 all the vcs used staid colors like maroon navy blue and forest green because they were trying to appeal to lps not founders. the yc logo itself is an inside joke the viaweb logo had been a white v on a red circle so i made the yc logo a white y on an orange square.14 yc did become a fund for a couple years starting in 2009 because it was getting so big i could no longer afford to fund it personally. but after heroku got bought we had enough money to go back to being selffunded.15 ive never liked the term deal flow because it implies that the number of new startups at any given time is fixed. this is not only false but its the purpose of yc to falsify it by causing startups to be founded that would not otherwise have existed.16 she reports that they were all different shapes and sizes because there was a run on air conditioners and she had to get whatever she could but that they were all heavier than she could carry now.17 another problem with hn was a bizarre edge case that occurs when you both write essays and run a forum. when you run a forum youre assumed to see if not every conversation at least every conversation involving you. and when you write essays people post highly imaginative misinterpretations of them on forums. individually these two phenomena are tedious but bearable but the combination is disastrous. you actually have to respond to the misinterpretations because the assumption that youre present in the conversation means that not responding to any sufficiently upvoted misinterpretation reads as a tacit admission that its correct. but that in turn encourages more anyone who wants to pick a fight with you senses that now is their chance.18 the worst thing about leaving yc was not working with jessica anymore. wed been working on yc almost the whole time wed known each other and wed neither tried nor wanted to separate it from our personal lives so leaving was like pulling up a deeply rooted tree.19 one way to get more precise about the concept of invented vs discovered is to talk about space aliens. any sufficiently advanced alien civilization would certainly know about the pythagorean theorem for example. i believe though with less certainty that they would also know about the lisp in mccarthys 1960 paper.but if so theres no reason to suppose that this is the limit of the language that might be known to them. presumably aliens need numbers and errors and io too. so it seems likely there exists at least one path out of mccarthys lisp along which discoveredness is preserved.

im usually reluctant to make predictions about technology but i feel fairly confident about this one in a couple decades there wont be many people who can write.one of the strangest things you learn if youre a writer is how many people have trouble writing. doctors know how many people have a mole theyre worried about people who are good at setting up computers know how many people arent writers know how many people need help writing.the reason so many people have trouble writing is that its fundamentally difficult. to write well you have to think clearly and thinking clearly is hard.and yet writing pervades many jobs and the more prestigious the job the more writing it tends to require.these two powerful opposing forces the pervasive expectation of writing and the irreducible difficulty of doing it create enormous pressure. this is why eminent professors often turn out to have resorted to plagiarism. the most striking thing to me about these cases is the pettiness of the thefts. the stuff they steal is usually the most mundane boilerplate  the sort of thing that anyone who was even halfway decent at writing could turn out with no effort at all. which means theyre not even halfway decent at writing.till recently there was no convenient escape valve for the pressure created by these opposing forces. you could pay someone to write for you like jfk or plagiarize like mlk but if you couldnt buy or steal words you had to write them yourself. and as a result nearly everyone who was expected to write had to learn how.not anymore. ai has blown this world open. almost all pressure to write has dissipated. you can have ai do it for you both in school and at work.the result will be a world divided into writes and writenots. there will still be some people who can write. some of us like it. but the middle ground between those who are good at writing and those who cant write at all will disappear. instead of good writers ok writers and people who cant write there will just be good writers and people who cant write.is that so bad isnt it common for skills to disappear when technology makes them obsolete there arent many blacksmiths left and it doesnt seem to be a problem.yes its bad. the reason is something i mentioned earlier writing is thinking. in fact theres a kind of thinking that can only be done by writing. you cant make this point better than leslie lamport didif youre thinking without writing you only think youre thinking.so a world divided into writes and writenots is more dangerous than it sounds. it will be a world of thinks and thinknots. i know which half i want to be in and i bet you do too.this situation is not unprecedented. in preindustrial times most peoples jobs made them strong. now if you want to be strong you work out. so there are still strong people but only those who choose to be.it will be the same with writing. there will still be smart people but only those who choose to be.

some politicians are proposing to introduce wealth taxes in addition to income and capital gains taxes. lets try modeling the effects of various levels of wealth tax to see what they would mean in practice for a startup founder.suppose you start a successful startup in your twenties and then live for another 60 years. how much of your stock will a wealth tax consumeif the wealth tax applies to all your assets its easy to calculate its effect. a wealth tax of 1 means you get to keep 99 of your stock each year. after 60 years the proportion of stock youll have left will be .9960 or .547. so a straight 1 wealth tax means the government will over the course of your life take 45 of your stock.losing shares does not obviously mean becoming net poorer unless the value per share is increasing by less than the wealth tax rate.heres how much stock the government would take over 60 years at various levels of wealth taxwealth taxgovernment takes0.160.5261.0452.0703.0844.0915.095a wealth tax will usually have a threshold at which it starts. how much difference would a high threshold make to model that we need to make some assumptions about the initial value of your stock and the growth rate.suppose your stock is initially worth 2 million and the companys trajectory is as follows the value of your stock grows 3x for 2 years then 2x for 2 years then 50 for 2 years after which you just get a typical public company growth rate which well call 8. 1 suppose the wealth tax threshold is 50 million. how much stock does the government take nowwealth taxgovernment takes0.150.5231.0412.0653.0794.0885.093it may at first seem surprising that such apparently small tax rates produce such dramatic effects. a 2 wealth tax with a 50 million threshold takes about two thirds of a successful founders stock.the reason wealth taxes have such dramatic effects is that theyre applied over and over to the same money. income tax happens every year but only to that years income. whereas if you live for 60 years after acquiring some asset a wealth tax will tax that same asset 60 times. a wealth tax compounds.

when i went to work for yahoo after they bought our startup in 1998 it felt like the center of the world. it was supposed to be the next big thing. it was supposed to be what google turned out to be.what went wrong the problems that hosed yahoo go back a long time practically to the beginning of the company. they were already very visible when i got there in 1998. yahoo had two problems google didnt easy money and ambivalence about being a technology company.moneythe first time i met jerry yang we thought we were meeting for different reasons. he thought we were meeting so he could check us out in person before buying us. i thought we were meeting so we could show him our new technology revenue loop. it was a way of sorting shopping search results. merchants bid a percentage of sales for traffic but the results were sorted not by the bid but by the bid times the average amount a user would buy. it was like the algorithm google uses now to sort ads but this was in the spring of 1998 before google was founded.revenue loop was the optimal sort for shopping search in the sense that it sorted in order of how much money yahoo would make from each link. but it wasnt just optimal in that sense. ranking search results by user behavior also makes search better. users train the search you can start out finding matches based on mere textual similarity and as users buy more stuff the search results get better and better.jerry didnt seem to care. i was confused. i was showing him technology that extracted the maximum value from search traffic and he didnt care i couldnt tell whether i was explaining it badly or he was just very poker faced.i didnt realize the answer till later after i went to work at yahoo. it was neither of my guesses. the reason yahoo didnt care about a technique that extracted the full value of traffic was that advertisers were already overpaying for it. if yahoo merely extracted the actual value theyd have made less.hard as it is to believe now the big money then was in banner ads. advertisers were willing to pay ridiculous amounts for banner ads. so yahoos sales force had evolved to exploit this source of revenue. led by a large and terrifyingly formidable man called anil singh yahoos sales guys would fly out to procter  gamble and come back with million dollar orders for banner ad impressions.the prices seemed cheap compared to print which was what advertisers for lack of any other reference compared them to. but they were expensive compared to what they were worth. so these big dumb companies were a dangerous source of revenue to depend on. but there was another source even more dangerous other internet startups.by 1998 yahoo was the beneficiary of a de facto ponzi scheme. investors were excited about the internet. one reason they were excited was yahoos revenue growth. so they invested in new internet startups. the startups then used the money to buy ads on yahoo to get traffic. which caused yet more revenue growth for yahoo and further convinced investors the internet was worth investing in. when i realized this one day sitting in my cubicle i jumped up like archimedes in his bathtub except instead of eureka i was shouting sellboth the internet startups and the procter  gambles were doing brand advertising. they didnt care about targeting. they just wanted lots of people to see their ads. so traffic became the thing to get at yahoo. it didnt matter what type. 1it wasnt just yahoo. all the search engines were doing it. this was why they were trying to get people to start calling them portals instead of search engines. despite the actual meaning of the word portal what they meant by it was a site where users would find what they wanted on the site itself instead of just passing through on their way to other destinations as they did at a search engine.i remember telling david filo in late 1998 or early 1999 that yahoo should buy google because i and most of the other programmers in the company were using it instead of yahoo for search. he told me that it wasnt worth worrying about. search was only 6 of our traffic and we were growing at 10 a month. it wasnt worth doing better.i didnt say but search traffic is worth more than other traffic i said oh ok. because i didnt realize either how much search traffic was worth. im not sure even larry and sergey did then. if they had google presumably wouldnt have expended any effort on enterprise search.if circumstances had been different the people running yahoo might have realized sooner how important search was. but they had the most opaque obstacle in the world between them and the truth money. as long as customers were writing big checks for banner ads it was hard to take search seriously. google didnt have that to distract them.hackersbut yahoo also had another problem that made it hard to change directions. theyd been thrown off balance from the start by their ambivalence about being a technology company.one of the weirdest things about yahoo when i went to work there was the way they insisted on calling themselves a media company. if you walked around their offices it seemed like a software company. the cubicles were full of programmers writing code product managers thinking about feature lists and ship dates support people yes there were actually support people telling users to restart their browsers and so on just like a software company. so why did they call themselves a media companyone reason was the way they made money by selling ads. in 1995 it was hard to imagine a technology company making money that way. technology companies made money by selling their software to users. media companies sold ads. so they must be a media company.another big factor was the fear of microsoft. if anyone at yahoo considered the idea that they should be a technology company the next thought would have been that microsoft would crush them.its hard for anyone much younger than me to understand the fear microsoft still inspired in 1995. imagine a company with several times the power google has now but way meaner. it was perfectly reasonable to be afraid of them. yahoo watched them crush the first hot internet company netscape. it was reasonable to worry that if they tried to be the next netscape theyd suffer the same fate. how were they to know that netscape would turn out to be microsofts last victimit would have been a clever move to pretend to be a media company to throw microsoft off their scent. but unfortunately yahoo actually tried to be one sort of. project managers at yahoo were called producers for example and the different parts of the company were called properties. but what yahoo really needed to be was a technology company and by trying to be something else they ended up being something that was neither here nor there. thats why yahoo as a company has never had a sharply defined identity.the worst consequence of trying to be a media company was that they didnt take programming seriously enough. microsoft back in the day google and facebook have all had hackercentric cultures. but yahoo treated programming as a commodity. at yahoo userfacing software was controlled by product managers and designers. the job of programmers was just to take the work of the product managers and designers the final step by translating it into code.one obvious result of this practice was that when yahoo built things they often werent very good. but that wasnt the worst problem. the worst problem was that they hired bad programmers.microsoft back in the day google and facebook have all been obsessed with hiring the best programmers. yahoo wasnt. they preferred good programmers to bad ones but they didnt have the kind of singleminded almost obnoxiously elitist focus on hiring the smartest people that the big winners have had. and when you consider how much competition there was for programmers when they were hiring during the bubble its not surprising that the quality of their programmers was uneven.in technology once you have bad programmers youre doomed. i cant think of an instance where a company has sunk into technical mediocrity and recovered. good programmers want to work with other good programmers. so once the quality of programmers at your company starts to drop you enter a death spiral from which there is no recovery. 2at yahoo this death spiral started early. if there was ever a time when yahoo was a googlestyle talent magnet it was over by the time i got there in 1998.the company felt prematurely old. most technology companies eventually get taken over by suits and middle managers. at yahoo it felt as if theyd deliberately accelerated this process. they didnt want to be a bunch of hackers. they wanted to be suits. a media company should be run by suits.the first time i visited google they had about 500 people the same number yahoo had when i went to work there. but boy did things seem different. it was still very much a hackercentric culture. i remember talking to some programmers in the cafeteria about the problem of gaming search results now known as seo and they asked what should we do programmers at yahoo wouldnt have asked that. theirs was not to reason why theirs was to build what product managers specd. i remember coming away from google thinking wow its still a startup.theres not much we can learn from yahoos first fatal flaw. its probably too much to hope any company could avoid being damaged by depending on a bogus source of revenue. but startups can learn an important lesson from the second one. in the software business you cant afford not to have a hackercentric culture.probably the most impressive commitment ive heard to having a hackercentric culture came from mark zuckerberg when he spoke at startup school in 2007. he said that in the early days facebook made a point of hiring programmers even for jobs that would not ordinarily consist of programming like hr and marketing.so which companies need to have a hackercentric culture which companies are in the software business in this respect as yahoo discovered the area covered by this rule is bigger than most people realize. the answer is any company that needs to have good software.why would great programmers want to work for a company that didnt have a hackercentric culture as long as there were others that did i can imagine two reasons if they were paid a huge amount or if the domain was interesting and none of the companies in it were hackercentric. otherwise you cant attract good programmers to work in a suitcentric culture. and without good programmers you wont get good software no matter how many people you put on a task or how many procedures you establish to ensure quality.hacker culture often seems kind of irresponsible. thats why people proposing to destroy it use phrases like adult supervision. that was the phrase they used at yahoo. but there are worse things than seeming irresponsible. losing for example.notes1 the closest we got to targeting when i was there was when we created pets.yahoo.com in order to provoke a bidding war between 3 pet supply startups for the spot as top sponsor.2 in theory you could beat the death spiral by buying good programmers instead of hiring them. you can get programmers who would never have come to you as employees by buying their startups. but so far the only companies smart enough to do this are companies smart enough not to need to.

y combinators 7th birthday was march 11. as usual we were so busy we didnt notice till a few days after. i dont think weve ever managed to remember our birthday on our birthday.on march 11 2005 jessica and i were walking home from dinner in harvard square. jessica was working at an investment bank at the time but she didnt like it much so she had interviewed for a job as director of marketing at a boston vc fund. the vc fund was doing what now seems a comically familiar thing for a vc fund to do taking a long time to make up their mind. meanwhile i had been telling jessica all the things they should change about the vc business  essentially the ideas now underlying y combinator investors should be making more smaller investments they should be funding hackers instead of suits they should be willing to fund younger founders etc.at the time i had been thinking about doing some angel investing. i had just given a talk to the undergraduate computer club at harvard about how to start a startup and it hit me afterward that although i had always meant to do angel investing 7 years had now passed since i got enough money to do it and i still hadnt started. i had also been thinking about ways to work with robert morris and trevor blackwell again. a few hours before i had sent them an email trying to figure out what we could do together.between harvard square and my house the idea gelled. wed start our own investment firm and jessica could work for that instead. as we turned onto walker street we decided to do it. i agreed to put 100k into the new fund and jessica agreed to quit her job to work for it. over the next couple days i recruited robert and trevor who put in another 50k each. so yc started with 200k.jessica was so happy to be able to quit her job and start her own company that i took her picture when we got home.the company wasnt called y combinator yet. at first we called it cambridge seed. but that name never saw the light of day because by the time we announced it a few days later wed changed the name to y combinator. we realized early on that what we were doing could be national in scope and we didnt want a name that tied us to one place.initially we only had part of the idea. we were going to do seed funding with standardized terms. before yc seed funding was very haphazard. youd get that first 10k from your friends rich uncle. the deal terms were often a disaster often neither the investor nor the founders nor the lawyer knew what the documents should look like. facebooks early history as a florida llc shows how random things could be in those days. we were going to be something there had not been before a standard source of seed funding.we modelled yc on the seed funding we ourselves had taken when we started viaweb. we started viaweb with 10k we got from our friend julian weber the husband of idelle weber whose painting class i took as a grad student at harvard. julian knew about business but you would not describe him as a suit. among other things hed been president of the national lampoon. he was also a lawyer and got all our paperwork set up properly. in return for 10k getting us set up as a company teaching us what business was about and remaining calm in times of crisis julian got 10 of viaweb. i remember thinking once what a good deal julian got. and then a second later i realized that without julian viaweb would never have made it. so even though it was a good deal for him it was a good deal for us too. thats why i knew there was room for something like y combinator.initially we didnt have what turned out to be the most important idea funding startups synchronously instead of asynchronously as it had always been done before. or rather we had the idea but we didnt realize its significance. we decided very early that the first thing wed do would be to fund a bunch of startups over the coming summer. but we didnt realize initially that this would be the way wed do all our investing. the reason we began by funding a bunch of startups at once was not that we thought it would be a better way to fund startups but simply because we wanted to learn how to be angel investors and a summer program for undergrads seemed the fastest way to do it. no one takes summer jobs that seriously. the opportunity cost for a bunch of undergrads to spend a summer working on startups was low enough that we wouldnt feel guilty encouraging them to do it.we knew students would already be making plans for the summer so we did what were always telling startups to do we launched fast. here are the initial announcement and description of what was at the time called the summer founders program.we got lucky in that the length and structure of a summer program turns out to be perfect for what we do. the structure of the yc cycle is still almost identical to what it was that first summer.we also got lucky in who the first batch of founders were. we never expected to make any money from that first batch. we thought of the money we were investing as a combination of an educational expense and a charitable donation. but the founders in the first batch turned out to be surprisingly good. and great people too. were still friends with a lot of them today.its hard for people to realize now how inconsequential yc seemed at the time. i cant blame people who didnt take us seriously because we ourselves didnt take that first summer program seriously in the very beginning. but as the summer progressed we were increasingly impressed by how well the startups were doing. other people started to be impressed too. jessica and i invented a term the y combinator effect to describe the moment when the realization hit someone that yc was not totally lame. when people came to yc to speak at the dinners that first summer they came in the spirit of someone coming to address a boy scout troop. by the time they left the building they were all saying some variant of wow these companies might actually succeed.now yc is well enough known that people are no longer surprised when the companies we fund are legit but it took a while for reputation to catch up with reality. thats one of the reasons we especially like funding ideas that might be dismissed as toys  because yc itself was dismissed as one initially.when we saw how well it worked to fund companies synchronously we decided wed keep doing that. wed fund two batches of startups a year.we funded the second batch in silicon valley. that was a last minute decision. in retrospect i think what pushed me over the edge was going to foo camp that fall. the density of startup people in the bay area was so much greater than in boston and the weather was so nice. i remembered that from living there in the 90s. plus i didnt want someone else to copy us and describe it as the y combinator of silicon valley. i wanted yc to be the y combinator of silicon valley. so doing the winter batch in california seemed like one of those rare cases where the selfindulgent choice and the ambitious one were the same.if wed had enough time to do what we wanted y combinator would have been in berkeley. that was our favorite part of the bay area. but we didnt have time to get a building in berkeley. we didnt have time to get our own building anywhere. the only way to get enough space in time was to convince trevor to let us take over part of his as it then seemed giant building in mountain view. yet again we lucked out because mountain view turned out to be the ideal place to put something like yc. but even then we barely made it. the first dinner in california we had to warn all the founders not to touch the walls because the paint was still wet.